This directory contains the GNU font utilities.  See `ChangeLog' or
`GNUmakefile.in' for the version number.  See `NEWS' for changes by release.

See the Texinfo manual in doc/ for installation and usage information.
The file INSTALL contains a copy of the installation instructions, as
plain text.

Send bug reports for the programs or documentation to
bug-gnu-utils@prep.ai.mit.edu.  (See the `Bugs' section of the manual
for discussion of how to submit an effective bug report.)  

Since there is no help-gnu-utils, you might as well also send questions
to bug-gnu-utils.

Suggestions for improvements (in either the programs or the manual), no
matter how small, are welcome.

The default installation prefix (we'll call it `$prefix') is the parent
of the directory that contains the command `gcc'.  Installing this
package will create a number of programs in $prefix/bin, and some files
in $prefix/lib/fontutil which support the programs.  (These directories
will also be created, if they do not exist.)

The GNU font utilities are free software.  See the files COPYING*
for copying permissions.

We need volunteers to help create fonts for the GNU project.  You do not
need to be an expert type designer to help, but you do need to know
enough about TeX and/or PostScript to be able to install and test new
fonts.  Example: if you know neither (1) the purpose of TeX utility
program `gftopk' nor (2) what the PostScript `scalefont' command does,
you probably need more experience before you can help.

If you can volunteer, the first step is to compile the font utilities.
After that, contact me (karl@gnu.ai.mit.edu).  I will get you a scanned
type specimen image.  The manual explains how to use these utilities to
turn that into a font you can use in TeX or PostScript.

Karl Berry		karl@cs.umb.edu
Kathryn Hargreaves	letters@cs.umb.edu
