This is the Berkeley fortune database program.  To submit fortunes,
mail one of (only one of, please):

	fortune@ucbvax.berkeley.edu
	ucbvax!fortune
	fortune@ucbvax.arpa

Fortunes are split into two parts -- non-offensive and potentially
offensive.  The former are in the file "scene", and the latter in
"obscene".  In the distribution, the file "obscene" is encrypted using
rot-13 encryption.  The program "Rot13" will undo this encryption.
When unpacking the shell archive, you will be asked if you want this
done automatically.  If you say anything which starts with a "y", it
will be done.  If you say anything else you will be asked if you want
to keep them around at all.  If you do, they will be kept in the
encrypted form, and you will be told how to decrypt.  If you don't want
to keep it around, it will be removed from your system.  In either of
these latter cases, the file "obscene" will contain a message to users
that the potentially offensive fortunes are not on your system.

The file "Notes" contains notes about the formatting and contents of
the fortune database.  If you want to add your own fortunes to the
database

		***************************************
		* => PLEASE READ "Notes" CAREFULLY <= *
		***************************************

The formatting stuff only keeps things looking nice, so we do recommend
that you follow it, but the notes about splitting out the potentially
offensive fortunes will keep you out of trouble if followed
sensitively.

To compile after extraction, you can just say "make".  "make install"
will install the program and database.  "Makefile" uses "BINDIR" and
"LIBDIR" for the directories, respectively.  "make clean" will clean
out unnecessary files.  If you change "LIBDIR", you must change
"FORTFILE" (see below).

The "DEFS" variable in the Makefile is for preprocessor directives.
Useful things to set here are:

	NO_RANDOM	Don't have the BSD random() function, so use
			the code in "rnd.c".
	REGCMP		Use regcmp() function for regular expressions --
			if this is not defined (and NO_REGEX is not
			defined), the regular expression handler is
			assumed to be regex().  regcmp() is the System
			V version; regex() is used on 4BSD.  I don't
			know what other systems will have -- consult
			your manual.
	NO_REGEX	No regular expression handler exists.

The "LIBS" variable is a separate library to look in for the regular
expression routines.  On 4BSD systems, it is in the default library, so
it should be set to nothing.

So, generally speaking, for BSD systems,

	DEFS=
	LIBS=

and for System V systems,

	DEFS=	-DREGCMP -DNO_RANDOM
	LIBS=	-lPW


The "USER" variable is the user to which "fortune" will be set-uid, and
which will own the fortune database.  The fortune database is set to be
readable only by the owner of the database to prevent random users from
printing out the database, which has lots of non-ascii stuff at the
front.  *This is a common error*, since it doesn't occur to everyone
that the database wouldn't be human-readable.  This method was used
after three people used up about half a box of line printer paper each
in a period of two days trying to print it out.  If you trust your
users, you might care to undo this, but I wouldn't if I were you.
"fortune" is carefully written so as not to be a security hole, but
USER should be not be set to "root" anyway.  On most systems it is
"games" or "daemon".

		Ken Arnold
		arnold@ucbvax.berkeley.edu
		ucbvax!arnold
