XMCD, Motif Toys, X11/Motif CD Audio Player

Xmcd is a full-featured CD Player for the X window system using the
Motif graphical user interface.  It transforms your CD-ROM or CD-R drive
into a stereo CD player, allowing you to play music CDs on your
computer.

Xmcd is designed to be attractive, feature-rich yet intuitive to use,
and takes advantage of many CD-ROM drive capabilities that are not
accessible via other players. A CD database feature is supported,
maintaining the disc artist/title, track titles, and arbitrary text
(such as band information and song lyrics). 

Moreover, xmcd supports network CD database queries. With this feature,
you do not need to have a local copy of the full CD database on your
system, thus saving disk space. Instead, xmcd connects to one or more of
the CDDB(tm) servers on the Internet to get the information when a CD
is loaded. This concept, pioneered by xmcd, is now supported by a
growing number of other client applications. Moreover, xmcd is
compatible with many firewall proxy configurations for CD database
server access. 

Xmcd also has "wwwWarp", the ability for xmcd to remote control a web
browser.  You may use xmcd to visit sites of interest on the web. You
can search the Internet, based on the currently playing artist, album
title, or track title. For example, you may read related discographies,
lyrics, art, reviews, sound clips, fan information, even related music
genres*.  The CDDB concept that was pioneered by xmcd several years ago
was a breakthrough use of Internet technology, and now xmcd continues
with that tradition and provides an unprecedented level of web
integration to the CD player.  Currently wwwWarp supports the Netscape
Navigator and Communicator, as well as the NCSA Mosaic browsers. 

The official xmcd web site is at: http://sunsite.unc.edu/tkan/xmcd/

