.\"
.\"   @(#)dp2xmcd.man	6.3 98/09/27
.\"
.\"   dp2xmcd - DiscPlay4-to-Xmcd CD database file converter
.\"
.\"   Copyright (C) 1993-1998  Ti Kan
.\"   E-mail: ti@amb.org
.\"
.\"   This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"   the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"   (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"   This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"   Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH DP2XMCD 1 "18 July 1998" "v2.4"

.SH "NAME"
dp2xmcd \- Discplay-to-xmcd CD database file converter

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B dp2xmcd
.nh
\fIinputfile\fP \fIoutputfile\fP

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.I DiscPlay
is a CD audio player utility for the Windows 95/98/NT platform from
Obvion Systems.
.I Dp2xmcd
is a simple program that converts
.I DiscPlay
version 4 CD database files to the
.I xmcd
format.  A specified
.I DiscPlay
CD database file is used as input
and a Xmcd CD database file are generated.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
xmcd(1), cda(1), cddbcmd(1), wm2xmcd(1),
.br
Xmcd web site: http://sunsite.unc.edu/tkan/xmcd/
.br
CDDB web site: http://www.cddb.com/

.SH "AUTHOR"
Ti Kan (\fIti@amb.org\fR)
.br
AMB Research Laboratories, Sunnyvale, CA, U.S.A.
.PP
Comments, suggestions, and bug reports are always welcome.
.PP
Inquiries about
.I DiscPlay
should be directed to its author,
Matt Jensen (\fIsupport@obvion.com\fR).
