.\"
.\"   @(#)wm2xmcd.man	6.9 98/09/27
.\"
.\"   wm2xmcd - Workman-to-Xmcd CD database file converter
.\"
.\"   Copyright (C) 1993-1998  Ti Kan
.\"   E-mail: ti@amb.org
.\"
.\"   This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"   the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"   (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"   This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"   Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH WM2XMCD 1 "18 March 1998" "v2.4"

.SH "NAME"
wm2xmcd \- workman-to-xmcd CD database file converter

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B wm2xmcd
.nh
[-\fIv\fP n] [-\fId\fP outdir] [-\fIc\fP] \fIworkmandb\fP ...

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Similar in function to
.I xmcd,
.I workman
is a CD audio player utility for the X window system, but
uses the XView/Open Look interface.
.I Wm2xmcd
is a simple program that converts
.I workman
CD database files to the
.I xmcd
format.  A specified
.I workman
CD database file is used as input
and Xmcd CD database files are generated.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.I Wm2xmcd
supports the following options:
.TP
.I \-v\ n
Specifies level of verbosity of output diagnostics.  Currently the
levels 0 through 3 are supported.  Level 0 is the "quietest" whereas
level 3 generates lots of messages.
.TP
.I \-d\ outdir
Specifies the output directory.  The default is
.B cddb
under the current directory.  If the
.I \-c
option is also specified, then subdirectories under
.I outdir
will be created.
.TP
.I \-c
With this option,
.I wm2xmcd
will prompt the user to type a category name for each CD entry
to be converted.  Each category will be a subdirectory under the
output directory.

.SH "NOTES"
.I Workman
uses a complex multi-line track title description scheme,
whereas
.I xmcd
uses a simple list of single-line titles.  Xmcd has flexible
free-form text fields associated with the CD as well as each track.
.I Wm2xmcd
currently expands the multi-line
.I workman
track entries into
a format that fits the
.I xmcd
list, but does not use the free-form text fields.
.PP
Some
.I workman
database keywords are ignored by this utility, notably
those that correspond to
.I workman
features that are irrelevant in
.I xmcd.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
xmcd(1), cda(1), cddbcmd(1),
.br
Xmcd web site: http://sunsite.unc.edu/tkan/xmcd/
.br
CDDB web site: http://www.cddb.com/

.SH "AUTHOR"
Ti Kan (\fIti@amb.org\fR)
.br
AMB Research Laboratories, Sunnyvale, CA, U.S.A.
.PP
Comments, suggestions, and bug reports are always welcome.
.PP
Inquiries about
.I workman
should be directed to its author,
Steve Grimm (\fIkoreth@hyperion.com\fR).
