.ad l
.nh
.TH CONVERT 1 "10 January 1993" "ImageMagick"
.SH NAME
combine - combine images to create new images.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "convert"
[ \fIoptions\fP ... ] \fIinput_file1\fP \fIinput_file2\fP \fIoutput_file\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Combine
combine images to create new images.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
To combine a image of a cockatoo with a perch, use
.PP
     combine cockatoo.miff perch.ras composite.miff
.PP
To compute the difference between images in a series, use
.PP
     combine -compose difference series.1 series.2 difference.miff
.PP
To combine a image of a cockatoo with a perch starting at location (100,150),
use
.PP
     combine -geometry +100+150 cockatoo.miff perch.ras composite.miff
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B "-alpha"
store alpha channel if the image has one.
.TP 5
.B "-colors \fIvalue\fP"
preferred number of colors in the image.

The actual number of colors in the image may be less than your request,
but never more.  Note, this is a color reduction option.  Images with
less unique colors than specified with this option will remain unchanged.
Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

Note, options \fB-dither\fP, \fB-colorspace\fP, and \fB-treedepth\fP affect
the color reduction algorithm.
.TP 5
.B "-colorspace \fIvalue\fP"
the type of colorspace: \fIGRAY\fP, \fIRGB\fP, \fIXYZ\fP, \fIYIQ\fP, or
\fIYUV\fP.

Color reduction, by default, takes place in the RGB color space.
Empirical evidence suggests that distances in color spaces such as YUV
or YIQ correspond to perceptual color differences more closely
than do distances in RGB space.  These color spaces may give better
results when color reducing an image.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for
more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-compose \fIoperator\fP"
the type of image composition.

By default, each of the composite image pixels are replaced by the
cooresponding image tile pixel. You can choose an alternate composite
operation:

    over
    in
    out
    atop
    xor
    plus
    minus
    add
    subtract
    difference
    replace
.PP
The operations behaves as follows:
.TP 9
.B over
The result will be the union of the two image shapes, with \fIimage\fP
obscuring \fIcomposite image\fP in the region of overlap.
.TP 9
.B in
The result is simply \fIimage\fP cut by the shape of \fIimage
window\fP.  None of the image data of \fIcomposite image\fP will be in the
result.
.TP 9
.B out
The resulting image is \fIimage\fP with the shape of \fIcomposite image\fP
cut out.
.TP 9
.B atop
The result is the same shape as image \fIcomposite image\fP, with
\fIimage\fP obscuring \fIcomposite image\fP where the image shapes
overlap.  Note this differs from \fBover\fP because the portion of
\fIimage\fP outside \fIcomposite image\fP's shape does not appear in the
result.
.TP 9
.B xor
The result is the image data from both \fIimage\fP and \fIcomposite image\fP
that is outside the overlap region.  The overlap region will be blank.
.TP 9
.B plus
The result is just the sum of the image data.  Output values are
clipped to 255 (no overflow).  This operation is independent
of the alpha channels.
.TP 9
.B minus
The result of \fIimage\fP \- \fIcomposite image\fP, with underflow clipped
to zero.  The alpha channel is ignored (set to 255, full coverage).
.TP 9
.B add
The result of \fIimage\fP + \fIcomposite image\fP, with overflow wrapping
around (\fImod\fP 256).
.TP 9
.B subtract
The result of \fIimage\fP - \fIcomposite image\fP, with underflow wrapping
around (\fImod\fP 256).  The \fBadd\fP and \fBsubtract\fP operators can
be used to perform reversible transformations.
.TP 9
.B difference
The result of abs(\fIimage\fP \- \fIcomposite image\fP).  This is useful
for comparing two very similar images.
.TP 9
.B replace
The resulting image is \fIcomposite image\fP replaced with \fIimage\fP.
Here the alpha information is ignored.

The image compositor requires an alpha, or matte channel in the image
for some operations.  This extra channel usually defines a mask which
represents a sort of a cookie-cutter for the image.  This is the case
when alpha is 255 (full coverage) for pixels inside the shape, zero
outside, and between zero and 255 on the boundary.  If \fIimage\fP does
not have an alpha channel, it is initialized with 0 for any pixel
matching in color to pixel location (0,0), otherwise 255 (to work
properly \fBborderwidth\fP must be 0).
.TP 5
.B "-compress \fItype\fP"
the type of image compression: \fIQEncoded\fP or \fIRunlengthEncoded\fP.

Specify \fB\+compress\fP to store the binary image in an uncompressed format.
The default is the compression type of the specified image file.
.TP 5
.B "-density \fI<width>x<height>
vertical and horizonal density of the image.

This option specifies an image density whose interpretation changes
with the type of image.  The default is 72 dots per inch in the
horizonal and vertical direction for Postscript.  Text files default to
80 characters in width and 60 lines in height.  Use this option to
alter the default density.
.TP 5
.B "-display \fIhost:display[.screen]\fP"
specifies the X server to contact; see \fBX(1)\fP.
.TP 5
.B "-dither"
apply Floyd/Steinberg error diffusion to the image.

The basic strategy of dithering is to trade intensity resolution for
spatial resolution by averaging the intensities of several neighboring
pixels.  Images which suffer from severe contouring when reducing colors
can be improved with this option.

The \fB-colors\fP option is required for dithering to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-geometry \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
the width and height of the image.  

Use this option to specified the width and height of raw images whose
dimensions are unknown such as GRAY, RGB, and CMYK.  This option can
also change the default 8.5 by 11 width and height of the Postscript
canvas.

By default the images are combined relative to the top left corner,
location (0,0).  Use \fI<x offset>\fP and \fI<y offset>\fP to specify
a particular location to combine the images.
.TP 5
.B "-quality \fIvalue\fP"
JPEG quality setting.  Quality is 0 (worst) to 100 (best). The default is
75.
.TP 5
.B "-scene \fIvalue\fP"
image scene number.
.TP 5
.B "-treedepth \fIvalue\fP"
Normally, this integer value is zero or one.  A zero or one tells
\fIDisplay\fP to choose a optimal tree depth for the color reduction
algorithm.

An optimal depth generally allows the best representation of the source
image with the fastest computational speed and the least amount of
memory.  However, the default depth is inappropriate for some images.
To assure the best representation, try values between 2 and 8 for this
parameter.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

The \fB-colors\fP option is required for this option to take effect.
.TP 5
.B -verbose
print detailed information about the image.

This information is printed: image scene number;  image name;  converted
image name;  image size;  the image class (\fIDirectClass\fP or 
\fIPseudoClass\fP);  the total number of unique colors;  and the number
of seconds to read and convert the image.
.PP
Change '-' to '+' in any option above to reverse its effect.  For
example, specify +alpha to store the image without its alpha channel.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
.TP 5
.B DISPLAY
To get the default host, display number, and screen.
.SH SEE ALSO
display(1), animate(1), mogrify(1), Quantize(9), X(1), MIFF(5)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1992 E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
.PP
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and
its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of E. I. du Pont de Nemours
& Company not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
distribution of the software without specific, written prior
permission.  E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company makes no representations
about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided
"as is" without express or implied warranty.
.PP
E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company disclaims all warranties with regard
to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness, in no event shall E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company be
liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any
damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether
in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising
out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.
.SH AUTHORS
John Cristy, E.I. du Pont De Nemours & Company Incorporated
