.ad l
.nh
.TH MOGRIFY 1 "10 October 1992" "ImageMagick"
.SH NAME
mogrify - transform an image or sequence of images
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "mogrify" [ \fIoptions\fP ...] \fIfile\fP
[ [ \fIoptions\fP ...] \fIfile\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIMogrify\fP transforms an image or a sequence of images.  These
transforms include image scaling, image rotation, color reduction, and
others.  The transmogrified image overwrites the original image.
.SH EXAMPLES
To scale an image of a cockatoo to exactly 640 pixels in width and 480
pixels in height, use:
.PP
    mogrify -geometry 640x480 cockatoo.miff
.PP
To create a single colormap for a sequence of bird images, use:
.PP
    mogrify -colors 256 scenes/birds.*
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B "-border \fI<width>x<height>fP"
surround the image with a border or color.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.

The color of the border is obtained from the X server and is defined as
\fBbackground\fP (class \fBBackground\fP).  See \fBX(1)\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-clip \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
preferred size and location of the clipped image.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.

Use clipping to apply image processing options, or transmogrify, only a
particular area of an image.
.TP 5
.B "-colormap \fIfilename\fP"
choose a particular set of colors from this image.

By default, color reduction chooses an optimal set of colors that
best represent the original image.  Alternatively, you can choose a
particular set of colors with this option.  This is useful when
you want to create a sequence of images with one particular set of
colors for each image.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required
for this option to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-colors \fIvalue\fP"
preferred number of colors in the image.

The actual number of colors in the image may be less than your request,
but never more.  Note, this is a color reduction option.  Images with
less unique colors than specified with this option will remain unchanged.
Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

If more than one image is specified on the command line, a single
colormap is created and saved with each image.

Note, options \fB-colormap\fP, \fB-dither\fP, \fB-colorspace\fP, and
\fB-treedepth\fP affect the color reduction algorithm.
.TP 5
.B "-colorspace \fIvalue\fP"
the type of colorspace: \fIGRAY\fP, \fIRGB\fP, \fIXYZ\fP, \fIYIQ\fP, or
\fIYUV\fP.

Color reduction, by default, takes place in the RGB color space.
Empirical evidence suggests that distances in color spaces such as YUV
or YIQ correspond to perceptual color differences more closely
than do distances in RGB space.  These color spaces may give better
results when color reducing an image.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for
more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required
for this option to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-compress \fItype\fP"
the type of image compression: \fIQEncoded\fP or \fIRunlengthEncoded\fP.

Specify \fB\+compress\fP to store the binary image in an uncompressed format.
The default is the compression type of the specified image file.
.TP 5
.B "-density \fI<width>x<height>
vertical and horizonal density of the image.

This option specifies an image density whose interpretation changes
with the type of image.  The default is 72 dots per inch in the
horizonal and vertical direction for Postscript.  Text files default to
80 characters in width and 60 lines in height.  Use this option to
alter the default density.
.TP 5
.B "-display \fIhost:display[.screen]\fP"
specifies the X server to contact; see \fBX(1)\fP.
.TP 5
.B "-dither"
apply Floyd/Steinberg error diffusion to the image.

The basic strategy of dithering is to trade intensity resolution for
spatial resolution by averaging the intensities of several neighboring
pixels.  Images which suffer from severe contouring when reducing colors
can be improved with this option.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-enhance"
apply a digital filter to enhance a noisy image.
.TP 5
.B "-gamma \fIvalue\fP"
level of gamma correction.

The same color image displayed on two different workstations may look
different due to differences in the display monitor.  Use gamma
correction to adjust for this color difference.  Reasonable values
extend from 0.8 to 2.3.
.TP 5
.B "-geometry \fI<width>x<height>\fP"
preferred size of the image window.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.

If the specified image size is smaller than the actual image size, the
image is first reduced to an integral of the specified image size with
an antialias digital filter.  The image is then scaled to the exact
specified image size with pixel replication.  If the specified image
size is greater than the actual image size, the image is first enlarged
to an integral of the specified image size with bilinear
interpolation.  The image is then scaled to the exact specified image
size with pixel replication.
.TP 5
.B "-inverse"
apply color inversion to image.

The red, green, and blue intensities of an image are negated.
.TP 5
.B "-monochrome"
transform the image to black and white.

Monochrome images can benefit from error diffusion.  Use \fB-dither\fP with
this option to diffuse the error.
.TP 5
.B "-noise"
reduce the noise in an image with a noise peak elimination filter.

The principal function of noise peak elimination filter is to smooth
the objects within an image without losing edge information and without
creating undesired structures.  The central idea of the algorithm is to
replace a pixel with its next neighbor in value within a 3 x 3 window,
if this pixel has been found to be noise.  A pixel is defined as noise
if and only if this pixel is a maximum or minimum within the 3 x 3 window.
.TP 5
.B "-normalize"
tranform image to span the full range of color values.  This is a contrast
enhancement technique.
.TP 5
.B "-reflect"
create a "mirror image" by reflecting the image scanlines.
.TP 5
.B "-roll \fI{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
roll an image vertically or horizontally.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.
 
A negative \fIx offset\fP rolls the image left-to-right.  A negative
\fIy offset\fP rolls the image top-to-bottom.
.TP 5
.B "-rotate \fIdegrees\fP"
apply Paeth image rotation to the image.

Empty triangles left over from rotating the image are filled with the
color defined by the pixel at location (0,0).  Refer to \fB-border\fP
to choose a specific color.
.TP 5
.B "-scale \fI<width factor>x<height factor>\fP"
preferred size factors of the image.

This option behaves like \fB-geometry\fP except the width and height values
are relative instead of absolute.  The image size is multiplied by the
width and height factors to obtain the final image dimensions.  If only
one factor is specified, both the width and height factors assume the
value.

Factors may be fractional.  To increase the size of an image, use a
scale factor greater than 1.0.  To decrease an image's size, use a
scale factor less than 1.0.  Default is 1.0.
.TP 5
.B "-scene \fIvalue\fP"
image scene number.
.TP 5
.B "-shear \fI<x degrees>x<y degrees>\fP"
shear the image along the X or Y axis by a positive or negative shear angle.

Shearing slides one edge of an image along the X or Y axis, creating a
parallelogram.  An X direction shear slides an edge along the X axis,
while a Y direction shear slides an edge along the Y axis.  The amount
of the shear is controlled by a shear angle.  For X direction shears,
\fIx degrees>\fP is measured relative to the Y axis, and similarly, for
Y direction shears \fIy degrees\fP is measured relative to the X axis.

Empty triangles left over from shearing the image are filled with the
color defined by the pixel at location (0,0).  Refer to \fB-border\fP
to choose a specific color.
.TP 5
.B "-treedepth \fIvalue\fP"
Normally, this integer value is zero or one.  A zero or one tells
\fIMogrify\fP to choose a optimal tree depth for the color reduction
algorithm.

An optimal depth generally allows the best representation of the source
image with the fastest computational speed and the least amount of
memory.  However, the default depth is inappropriate for some images.
To assure the best representation, try values between 2 and 8 for this
parameter.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B -verbose
print detailed information about the image.

This information is printed: image scene number;  image name;  image
size; the image class (\fIDirectClass\fP or \fIPseudoClass\fP); the total
number of unique colors (if known);  and the number of seconds to read and
transform the image.  Refer to \fBMIFF(5)\fP for a description of
the image class.

If \fB-colors\fP is also specified, the total unique colors in the image
and color reduction error values are printed.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP
for a description of these values.
.PP
Any option you specify on the command line remains in effect until it is
explicitly changed by specifying the option again with a different effect.
For example, to mogrify two images, the first with 32 colors and the
second with only 16 colors, use:
.PP
     mogrify -colors 32 cockatoo.miff -colors 16 macaw.miff
.PP
Change \fI-\fP to \fI\+\fP in any option above to reverse its effect.
For example, specify \fB\+compress\fP to store the binary image in an
uncompressed format.
.PP
To specify a particular image format prefix \fIfile\fP with the image
type and a colon (i.e. mtv:image) or specify the image type as the
filename suffix (i.e. image.mtv).  See \fBCONVERT(1)\fP for a list of
valid image formats.  If \fIfile\fP has the extension \fB.Z\fP, the
file size is reduced using Lempel-Ziv coding with \fBcompress\fP.  If
\fIfile\fP already exists, you will be prompted as to whether it should
be overwritten.
.SH SEE ALSO
display(1), animate(1), import(1), convert(1), Quantize(9), MIFF(5), X(1),
compress(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1992 E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
.PP
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and
its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of E. I. du Pont de Nemours
& Company not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
distribution of the software without specific, written prior
permission.  E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company makes no representations
about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided
"as is" without express or implied warranty.
.PP
E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company disclaims all warranties with regard
to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness, in no event shall E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company be
liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any
damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether
in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising
out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Michael Halle, Spatial Imaging Group at MIT, for the initial
implementation of Alan Paeth's image rotation algorithm.
.PP
David Pensak, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, for providing a
computing environment that made this program possible.
.PP
Paul Raveling, USC Information Sciences Institute, for the original
idea of using space subdivision for the color reduction algorithm.
.SH AUTHORS
John Cristy, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company Incorporated
