.TH xdiary 1 "Release 4" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
\fIxdiary\fP \- interactive diary and calendar for X11 R4
.SH SYNTAX
\fIxdiary\fP [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIxdiary\fP is an X application that displays a calendar in one of two
formats and/or an interactive daily diary.
.SH OPTIONS
\fIxdiary\fP accepts all of the standard toolkit command line options along
with the following:
.IP "\fB-linewidth\fP \fIpixels\fP" 12
This option indicates how many pixels wide the lines composing the
calendar grid should be.  By default, the grid lines are one pixel wide.
.IP "\fB-fullgeometry\fP \fIgeometry\fP" 12
This option indicates the geometry to be used when determining the
size and position of the full year calendar.  The full year
calendar will default to the minimum size needed to hold calendars
for all twelve months based on the specified font,
abbreviation, and language options.
.IP "\fB-singlegeometry\fP \fIgeometry\fP" 12
This option indicates the geometry to be used when determining the
size and position of the single month calendar.  The single month
calendar will default to the minimum size needed to hold a calendar
for a single month based on the specified font, abbreviation,
and language options.
.IP "\fB-diarygeometry\fP \fIgeometry\fP" 12
This option indicates the geometry to be used when determining the
size and position of the diary.
.IP "\fB-digitfont\fP \fIfont-name\fP" 12
This option indicates the font to be used for the digits that will
appear in the calendar cells.
.IP "\fB-weekdayfont\fP \fIfont-name\fP" 12
This option indicates the font to be used for the weekday names
that will appear above each column of cells in the calendar.
.IP "\fB-titlefont\fP \fIfont-name\fP" 12
This option indicates the font to be used for the calendar
title(s) that will appear above each calendar specifying the
calendar's month and year.
.IP "\fB-digitgravity\fP \fIgravity\fP" 12
This option indicates the placement of the digits within the cells
of the calendars, where \fIgravity\fP is one of the following:
.IP
NorthWest, North, NorthEast, West, Center, East, SouthWest, South, SouthEast
.IP "\fB-startingweekday\fP \fIday-name\fP" 12
This option indicates which day of the week should correspond to
the days in the left-most column of the calendar.  Sunday is the
default.
.IP "\fB-language\fP \fIlanguage-name\fP" 12
This option indicates what language the calendar should display
all of its text in.  Currently  English, Spanish, French, and
German are available.  Be sure to specify fonts with complete
Latin-1 character specifications when specifying foreign languages.
.IP "\fB-diaryfile\fP \fIdiary-filename\fP" 12
This option indicates the filename that will be used to read the
diary daily information from.  Any changes to the diary will be
saved to this file when the save or quit menu option is selected.
By default, the file ~/.xdiary will be used.
.IP "\fB-templatefile\fP \fItemplate-filename\fP" 12
This option indicates the filename that will be used to read the diary entry
template from.  By default, the file ~/.xdiary-template will be used.
If that file does not exist and if this option is not specified, then no diary
entry template will be used.
.IP \fB-nocalendar\fP 12
This option indicates that upon startup no calendar is to be
displayed along with the diary.  By default, a calendar will be displayed.
.IP \fB-nodiary\fP 12
This option indicates that upon startup no diary is to be
displayed along with the calendar.  By default, a diary will be displayed.
.IP "\fB-abbrev\fP \fIcount\fP" 12
This option indicates that the weekday names that will appear
above each column in the calendar(s) should be abbreviated to \fIcount\fP
characters.  By default, weekday names will be abbreviated to three characters.
.IP \fB-long\fP 12
This option indicates that the weekday names that will appear
above each column in the calendar(s) should not be abbreviated.
.IP \fB-fullyear\fP 12
This option indicates that a full year calendar is to be
displayed.
.IP \fB-singlemonth\fP 12
This option indicates that only a single month calendar is to be
displayed.  This is true by default.
.IP \fIdate-string\fP 12
A string specifying the date for the calendar and diary to display
upon startup.  If no string is specified, the current date is
used.  The string may be completely numeric or it may contain a
month name.  However, if a language option is specified, the month
name must be in the specified language.
.IP
Several formats are accepted, as well as incomplete dates:
.nf
.IP
	9/17/66
	17.9.66
	Sep 17, 1966
	17 september 66
	Sept 66
	1966
.fi
.PP
Case is ignored and non-ambiguous abbreviations for the options and
arguments are accepted.
.SH OPERATION
The diary and calendar are intended to be as intuitive to use as
possible.  
.PP
The \fBday\fP backward and forward arrows make the calendar and diary
display the previous day and next day respectively.
.PP
The \fBmonth\fP backward and forward arrows make the calendar display the
previous month and next month respectively.  However, the diary
remains unchanged.
.PP
The \fByear\fP backward and forward arrows make the calendar display the
previous year and next year respectively.  However, the diary remains
unchanged.
.PP
The \fBentry\fP backward and forward arrows make the diary display the
previous entry and next entry respectively.  The calendar is kept in
sync with the current diary entry.
.PP
The pointer may be used to select any date on the calendar that is
currently visible.  The diary will then display the entry (if any)
for the selected date.
.PP
When the pointer is in the diary text window, any text typed will
become part of the diary entry for the currently displayed date.
.PP
Clicking on the \fBoption\fP button will pull down a menu with the
following selections:
.IP \fBToday\fP 12
Make the calendar display today's date and make the diary display
the corresponding diary entry.
.IP \fBWarp\fP 12
Pops up a dialog box and enables the user to type in a date for
the calendar and diary to display.  The format of this date is
identical to that of the \fIdate-string\fP described above.  Any month
strings must be in the language specified.  Pressing the return
key terminates input.  Bogus dates will be quietly ignored.
.IP \fBDiary\fP 12
Hides the diary.  If the \fB-nodiary\fP command line option was
specified, or if the diary has already been hidden, this option
brings the diary back into view.
.IP \fBFull\fP 12
Change the calendar to a full year calendar.  If the full year
calendar is currently being displayed, this option hides the full
year calendar so that only the diary is visible.  If the \fB-nocalendar\fP
option was specified, or if the full year calendar is currently hidden, then
the full year calendar may be brought into view by selecting this menu
item.
.IP \fBSingle\fP 12
Change the calendar to a single month calendar.  If the single
month calendar is currently being displayed, this option hides the
single month calendar so that only the diary is visible.  If the \fB-nocalendar\fP
option was specified, or if the single month calendar is currently hidden, then
the single month calendar may be brought into view by selecting this menu
item.
.IP \fBSave\fP 12
Save the diary changes made during this session (if any) in the
diary file.
.IP \fBQuit\fP 12
Exit the \fIxdiary\fP application.  If the contents of the diary have
not been saved, they will be saved before the application exits.
.SH TEMPLATES
A template is an ascii file whose contents will be used for any diary entry
that did not exist prior to the invocation of the \fIxdiary\fP application.
.PP
Templates allow you to customize the format of the diary entries.  For
example, a template file could be created with the following contents:
.PP
.nf
\fL	 7:00
	 8:00
	 9:00
	10:00
	11:00
	 noon
	 1:00
	 2:00
	 3:00
	 4:00
	 5:00\fP
.fi
.PP
The above template would be useful for appointment scheduling and time
management whereas the following template would be useful for logging work:
.PP
.nf
\fL	Things to do today:
	1.
	2.
	3.

	Things done today:
	1.
	2.
	3.\fP
.fi
.PP
Once text is added to the template, the template becomes part of the diary
entry and can be edited for further customization.
.PP
If no template file is specified, and if the file ~/.xdiary-template does not
exist, then all diary entries that did not exist prior
to the invocation of the \fIxdiary\fP application will initially be empty.
.SH DIARY FILE FORMAT
The format chosen for the diary file is very simple so that it is
possible to delete, add or change diary entries easily from a text
editor.  The entry format is a newline terminated date string
followed by a newline terminated double quote enclosed information
string.  Double quotes within the information string are
allowed, but they must be doubled (i.e. "").  A series of these
entries make up the diary file.
.PP
The following two diary entries illustrate the format of the diary file:
.PP
.nf
	9/17/1966
	"Meeting with Steve and Sally went as expected."
.PP
	9/18/1966
	"Dave said, ""Buy stock in IBM.""  I can't
	wait to make him eat his own words."
.fi
.PP
The entries may initially appear in any order, however they are
always saved in ascending order by the \fIxdiary\fP application.
.SH CUSTOMIZATION
The \fIxdiary\fP application class name is Xdiary.
.PP
\fIxdiary\fP has a small application defaults file which is used simply to
select default fonts and to configure the text widget used by the diary.
.PP
The \fIxdiary\fP application is divided into three independent parts:
.IP xdiary.full
This references the top level window of the full year calendar part.
.IP xdiary.single
This references the top level window of the single month calendar
part.
.IP xdiary.diary
This references the top level window of the diary calendar part.
.PP
The full and single calendar parts have a large number of resources
which can be specified to customize their appearance.
.PP
The diary's appearance can also be customized.  In addition, the text
widget has few hard coded resources and can be customized in many ways.
.PP
.SH WIDGET HIERARCHY
In order to specify resources, it is useful to know the hierarchy of the
widgets which compose \fIxdiary\fP.  In the notation below, indentation
indicates hierarchical structure.  The widget class name is given first,
followed by the widget instance name.
.PP
.nf
Xdiary xdiary
   Shell single
      Paned paned
         ButtonBox buttons
            MenuButton option
            Form form
               Label month
               Command dec
               Command inc
            Form form
               Label year
               Command dec
               Command inc
         Form form
            Calendar calendar
   Shell full
      Paned paned
         ButtonBox buttons
            MenuButton option
            Form form
               Label year
               Command dec
               Command inc
         Form form
            Calendar january
            Calendar february
            Calendar march
            Calendar april
            Calendar may
            Calendar june
            Calendar july
            Calendar august
            Calendar september
            Calendar october
            Calendar november
            Calendar december
   Shell diary
      Paned paned
         ButtonBox buttons
            MenuButton option
            Form form
               Label day
               Command dec
               Command inc
            Form form
               Label entry
               Command dec
               Command inc
            Label label
         Form form
            AsciiText text
.fi
.SH APPLICATION RESOURCES
Resources that reflect command line options:
.PP
.IP "xdiary*noCalendar: \fIBoolean\fP"
Same as the \fB-nocalendar\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*noDiary: \fIBoolean\fP"
Same as the \fB-nodiary\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*language: \fILanguage\fP"
Same as the \fB-language\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*abbrev: \fIInteger\fP"
Same as the \fB-abbrev\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*long: \fIBoolean\fP"
Same as the \fB-long\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*diaryFile: \fIFilename\fP"
Same as the \fB-diaryfile\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*templateFile: \fIFilename\fP"
Same as the \fB-templatefile\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*fullYear: \fIBoolean\fP"
Same as the \fB-fullyear\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*singleMonth: \fIBoolean\fP"
Same as the \fB-singlemonth\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*Calendar*lineWidth: \fIInteger\fP"
Same as the \fB-linewidth\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*full*geometry: \fIGeometry\fP"
Same as the \fB-fullgeometry\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*single*geometry: \fIGeometry\fP"
Same as the \fB-singlegeometry\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*diary*geometry: \fIGeometry\fP"
Same as the \fB-diarygeometry\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*single*digitFont: \fIFont\fP"
Same as the \fB-digitfont\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*single*weekdayFont: \fIFont\fP"
Same as the \fB-weekdayfont\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*single*titleFont: \fIFont\fP"
Same as the \fB-titlefont\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*digitGravity: \fIGravity\fP"
Same as the \fB-digitgravity\fP option.
.IP "xdiary*startingWeekday: \fIWeekday\fP"
Same as the \fB-startingweekday\fP option.
.PP
The following resources may be specified in a resource file as a comma
separated list of quoted strings:
.IP "xdiary*Calendar*weekdayNames: \fIStringTable\fP"
Specify the names of the weekdays to be used in the calendar(s).
Seven strings must be specified.  When specifying weekday names as
a resource, the \fB-language\fP, \fB-long\fP, and \fB-abbrev\fP
options must not be specified.
.IP "xdiary*Calendar*monthNames: \fIStringTable\fP"
Specify the names of the months to be used in the calendar(s).
Twelve strings must be specified.
.IP "xdiary*Calendar*digitNames: \fIStringTable\fP"
Specify the names of the digits to be used in the calendar(s).
Thrity-one strings must be specified.  Added mostly for orthogonality,
but could be used to specify characters in a specialized calendar
font or to specify Roman numerals, etc.
.SH FILES
.IP ~/.xdiary
The default diary file.
.IP ~/.xdiary-template
The default template file.
.IP/usr/lib/X11/app-defaults/Xdiary
The application defaults resource file.
.SH SEE ALSO
X(1), xrdb(1), the Athena Widget Set, Calendar.doc
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIxdiary\fP attempts to recover from syntax errors in the diary file, however
there's no limit to the number of error messages produced so feeding it an
entirely bogus file is not recommended.
.PP
Specifying fonts that do not exist will result in an X Protocol BadName
fatal error.
.SH BUGS
\fIxdiary\fP doesn't do any file locking, so if multiple \fIxdiaries\fP are
running based off the same diary file, the last one to save its diary wins.
.PP
The diary entries in the diary file do not append, therefore the last
entry with a given date will replace any previous entries with the same
date, and the previous entries will be lost after \fIxdiary\fP saves the diary
(if any changes have been made).  This is only a problem if the diary
file is edited by a text editor other than the one provided by \fIxdiary\fP.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1990 Harris Corporation
.PP
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute, this software and its
documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that
the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
documentation, and that the name of the copyright holder be used in
advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software with
specific, written prior permission, and that no fee is charged for further
distribution of this software, or any modifications thereof.  The copyright
holder makes no representations about the suitability of this software for
any purpose.  It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
.PP
THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE,
INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, AND IN NO
EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM ITS USE,
LOSS OF DATA, PROFITS, QPA OR GPA, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH
THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Jason Baietto
jason@ssd.csd.harris.com
