.TH XRWHO 1 "October 1992" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xrwho - display of who is logged into local machines for X
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xrwho
[ -toolkitoption ] [-option ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xrwho
displays the users logged into hosts on the local network.
.I xrwho
runs under the
.I X
window system.
.I xrwho
creates a window in which the names of local machines
and the users that are on these machines are displayed.
Each host machine has its own box in which the users
logged onto this machine are shown.
.PP
.I xrwho
acts in most respects like
.I rwho(1).
Users that have been idle for more than 5 minutes are
displayed as shaded, rather than full intensity. Users
who have been idle for more than one hour, and host machines
that have no users logged in, are usually not shown.
If nothing has been heard from a machine for 5 minutes
then the host is assumed to be down and no information
is displayed for that machine.
.PP
.I xrwho
uses the
.I X Toolkit
to display the windows, and so accepts options like 
.B \-geometry, \-fg
colour and
.B \-display \fIhost:display.\fP
In addition to these standard
.I Xt
flags, 
.I xrwho
understands the following options:
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-a
displays users with idle times over one hour
.TP 8
.B \-l
display host names and boxes even when no users are logged in
.TP 8
.B \-b
shows a tiny box when a host has no users (only one of
.B \-b
and
.B \-l
may be used).
.TP 8
.B \-snoop \fI<user1>,<user2>,...\fP
highlight particular users using a different colour.
.TP 8
.B \-bell
ring the console bell when a snooped user arrives.
.TP 8
.B \-font \fIfontname\fP
user names will be displayed in the specified font (if none
is specified, this defaults to helvetica).
.TP 8
.B \-hostfont \fIfontname\fP
host names will be displayed in the specified font (if none
is specified, this defaults to helvetica oblique).
.TP 8
.B \-hostfg \fIcolour\fP
host names will be displayed in the specified colour (default blue)
.TP 8
.B \-hostbg \fIcolour\fP
host names will be displayed in a box of the specified colour.
.TP 8
.B \-highlight \fIcolour\fP
snoop users will be displayed in the specified colour (default red)
.PP
.SH X DEFAULTS
The widget classes used by 
.I xrwho
are:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Box
Label
Viewport
.fi
.PP
.RE
Some of the X resources used by
.I xrwho
are:
.PP
.TP 20
.B font
set the font for user names.
.TP 20
.B host.font
set the font for the hostname.
.TP 20
.B foreground
set the window foreground colour
.TP 20
.B background
set the window background colour
.TP 20
.B host.foreground
set the host label foreground colour
.TP 20
.B host.background
set the host box background colour
.TP 20
.B snoop.foreground
set the colour that snoop users appear in
.TP 20
.B Label*borderWidth
set the width of the border in pixels around the labels (default 0)
.TP 20
.B vSpace
set the vertical spacing in pixels between host boxes (default 1)
.PP
For example, the following could be put into your ~/.Xdefaults file:
.PP
.EX
.nf
xrwho*foreground:        black
xrwho*background:        white
xrwho*host.foreground:   white
xrwho*host.background:   blue
xrwho*snoop.foreground:  red
xrwho*Label*borderWidth: 0
xrwho*borderColor:       black
xrwho*vSpace:            1
xrwho*font:      -*-helvetica-*-r-*-*-*-100-*-*-*-*-*-*
xrwho*host.font: -*-helvetica-*-*-*-*-*-100-*-*-*-*-*-*
.fi
.EE
.PP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
DISPLAY - to get the default host and display number.
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
X(1), xrdb(1), rwho(1C), rwhod(1M)
.PP
.SH FILES
/usr/spool/rwho/*
.PP
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Various X errors.
.PP
.SH BUGS
There is currently a maximum of 32 snoop users.
.PP
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
.TP 20
Andrew Herbert
andrewh@cs.monash.edu.au
andrew@werple.apana.org.au
.fi
.TP 20
Robin Humble
rjh@pixel.maths.monash.edu.au
