-*- text -*-

Changes since 2.1:

Configurations that are still in development (and therefore are convenient to
have listed in configure.in) still get rejected without a minor change to
gas/Makefile.in, so people not doing development work shouldn't get the
impression that support for such configurations is actually believed to be
reliable.

The program name (usually "as") is printed when a fatal error message is
displayed.  This should prevent some confusion about the source of occasional
messages about "internal errors".

ELF support is falling into place.  Support for the 386 should be working.
Support for SPARC Solaris is in.  HPPA support from Utah is being integrated.

Symbol values are maintained as expressions instead of being immediately boiled
down to add-symbol, sub-symbol, and constant.  This permits slightly more
complex calculations involving symbols whose values are not alreadey known.

Now "make check" should work.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Changes for 2.1:

Several small fixes for i386-aix (PS/2) support from Minh Tran-Le have been
incorporated, but not well tested yet.

Altered the opcode table split for m68k; it should require less VM to compile
with gcc now.

Some minor adjustments to add (Convergent Technologies') Miniframe support,
suggested by Ronald Cole.

HPPA support (running OSF only, not HPUX) has been contributed by Utah.  This
includes improved ELF support, which I've started adapting for SPARC Solaris
2.x.  Integration isn't completely, so it probably won't work.

HP9000/300 support, donated by HP, has been merged in.

Ian Taylor has finished the MIPS ECOFF (Ultrix, Irix) support.

Better error messages for unsupported configurations (e.g., hppa-hpux).

Test suite framework is starting to become reasonable.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Changes for 2.0:

Mostly bug fixes.

Some more merging of BFD and ELF code, but ELF still doesn't work.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Changes for 1.94:

BFD merge is partly done.  Adventurous souls may try giving configure the
"--with-bfd-assembler" option.  Currently, ELF format requires it, a.out format
accepts it; SPARC CPU accepts it.  It's the default only for OS "elf" or
"solaris".  (ELF isn't really supported yet.  It needs work.  I've got some
code from Utah for HP-PA ELF, and from DG for m88k ELF, but they're not fully
merged yet.)

The 68K opcode table has been split in half.  It should now compile under gcc
without consuming ridiculous amounts of memory.

A couple data structures have been reduced in size.  This should result in
saving a little bit of space at runtime.

Support for MIPS, from OSF and Ralph Campbell, has been merged in.  The OSF
code provided ROSE format support, which I haven't merged in yet.  (I can make
it available, if anyone wants to try it out.)  Ralph's code, for BSD 4.4,
supports a.out format.  We don't have ECOFF support in just yet; it's coming.

Support for the Hitachi H8/500 has been added.

VMS host and target support should be working now, thanks chiefly to Eric
Youngdale.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Changes for 1.93.01:

For m68k, support for more processors has been added: 68040, CPU32, 68851.

For i386, .align is now power-of-two; was number-of-bytes.

For m68k, "%" is now accepted before register names.  For COFF format, which
doesn't use underscore prefixes for C labels, it is required, so variable "a0"
can be distinguished from the register.

Last public release was 1.38.  Lots of configuration changes since then, lots
of new CPUs and formats, lots of bugs fixed.


Local variables:
fill-column: 79
End:
