\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename wdiff.info
@settitle A word difference finder
@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
This file documents the the @code{wdiff} command, which compares two
files, finding which words have been deleted or added to the first
for getting the second.

Copyright (C) 1992 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title wdiff
@subtitle The word difference finder
@subtitle Edition 1.0, for wdiff Version 1.0
@subtitle June 1992
@author by Francois Pinard

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1992 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Copying, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This file documents the the @code{wdiff} command, which compares two
files, finding which words have been deleted or added to the first for
getting the second.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Copying::			How you can copy and share @code{wdiff}.
* Overview::                    Preliminary information.
* Invoking wdiff::              How to run @code{wdiff}.
* Examples::			How some people used @code{wdiff}.
* Problems::                    Reporting bugs.
@end menu

@node Copying, Overview, Top, Top
@include gpl.texinfo

@node Overview, Invoking wdiff, Copying, Top
@chapter Overview

The program @code{wdiff} is a front end to @code{diff} for comparing
files on a word per word basis.  A word is anything between whitespace.
This is useful for comparing two texts in which a few words have been
changed and for which paragraphs have been refilled.  It works by
creating two temporary files, one word per line, then execute
@code{diff} on these.  It collects the @code{diff} output and uses it to
produce a nicer display of word differences in the original files.

Ideally, @code{wdiff} should avoid calling @code{diff} and do all the
work internally, being more polished and speedy.  However, I loathe
replicating @code{diff} algorithm and effort elsewhere, instead of
improving @code{diff} itself.  It would be more sensible to integrate
@code{wdiff} in @code{diff} than the other way around.  I did it this
way only because I had a sudden and urgent need for it, and it would
have taken more time to do it correctly into GNU @code{diff}.  Your
advices or opinions about this are welcome.

@code{wdiff} was written by Francois Pinard.
@c *** Comment placer la ce'dille?

@node Invoking wdiff, Examples, Overview, Top
@chapter Invoking @code{wdiff}

The format for running the @code{wdiff} program is:

@example
wdiff @var{option} @dots{} @var{file_1} @var{file_2}
@end example

@code{wdiff} will compare files @var{file_1} and @var{file_2},
considering @var{file_1} as the old version of the text and @var{file_2}
as the new version of the same text, and produce an annotated copy of
@var{file_2} on standard output.

@code{wdiff} will exit with a status of 0 if no difference were found,
with a status of 1 if any difference was found or with a status of 2 for
any other kind of reason of error.

Usually, underlining is used to mark deleted words, while bolding or
reverse video is used to makr added words; this is adjustable in many
ways.  @code{wdiff} supports the following options:

@table @samp
@item --help
@itemx -h
Print an informative help message describing the options.

@item --version
@itemx -v
Print the version number of @code{wdiff} on the standard error output.

@item --no-deleted
@itemx -1
Avoid producing deleted words on the output.  If none of @samp{-1} and
@samp{-2} is selected, it might happen that the right margin will be
exceeded for some lines, respective to the original formatting.

@item --no-inserted
@itemx -2
Avoid producing inserted words on the output.  If none of @samp{-1} and
@samp{-2} is selected, it might happen that the right margin will be
exceeded for some lines, respective to the original formatting.

@item --no-common
@itemx -3
Avoid producing common words on the output.  When this option is not
selected, common words and whitespace are taken from @var{file_2}.  When
selected, differences are segregated from one other by lines containing
only a few dashes.  Moreover, if this option is selected at the same
time @samp{-1} or @samp{-2} is, then all of the output, if any, would
have the same kind of emphasis; @code{wdiff} rather selects to do no
emphasis at all.  Finally, if this option is not selected, but both
@samp{-1} and @samp{-2} are, sections of common words between
differences are segregated from one other by lines containing only a few
dashes.

@item --printer
@itemx -p
Use overstriking to emphasize parts of output.  Each character of the
deleted words is underlined by writing an underscore @samp{_} first,
than a backspace and the letter to be underlined.  Each character of the
added words are bolded by writing them twice, with a backspace in
between.  This option is not selected by default.

@item --statistics
@item -s
At end of program, tell for each file the total number of words, how
many words were common between files, how many were deleted or inserted
and, finally, how many have changed (a changed word has been replaced or
is part of a replacement).  Save for the total number of words itself,
numbers are followed by a percentage relative to the total number of
words for the file.

@item --terminal
@itemx -t
Force the production of @code{termcap} strings for emphasizing parts of
output, even if the standard output is not associated with a terminal.
The @samp{TERM} environment variable should still contain the name of a
valid @code{termcap} entry, however.  This option is automatically
selected whenever the standard output is associated with a terminal.  If
you ever need to deselect this option while still getting the output to
the terminal, simply pipe the output of @code{wdiff} through @code{cat}
as in:

@example
wdiff @var{file_1} @var{file_2} | cat
@end example

@item --start-delete
@item -w
Use the following argument as the @dfn{start delete} string.  This
string would be output prior to any sequence of deleted text, to mark
where it starts.  By default, there is no start delete string unless
there is no other means of distinguishing where such text starts; in
which case the start delete string is @samp{[-}.

@item --end-delete
@item -x
Use the following argument as the @dfn{end delete} string.  This string
would be output after any sequence of deleted text, to mark where it
ends.  By default, there is no end delete string unless there is no
other means of distinguishing where such text ends; in which case the
end delete string is @samp{-]}.

@item --start-insert
@item -y
Use the following argument as the @dfn{start insert} string.  This
string would be output prior to any sequence of inserted text, to mark
where it starts.  By default, there is no start insert string unless
there is no other means of distinguishing where such text starts; in
which case the start insert string is @samp{@{+}.

@item --end-insert
@item -z
Use the following argument as the @dfn{end insert} string.  This string
would be output after any sequence of inserted text, to mark where it
ends.  By default, there is no end insert string unless there is no
other means of distinguishing where such text ends; in which case the
end insert string is @samp{+@}}.
@end table

If your system has the program @code{less} or else, the program
@code{more}, and if the output of @code{wdiff} is directly associated to
a terminal, the program will then automatically pipe its output through
one of these pagers.  The @samp{PAGER} environment variable, if set,
overrides the built-in selection of a pager.  When a pager is selected,
the @samp{-t} option is forced so the pager will still display the
emphasized parts of the text.  However, in the special case @code{wdiff}
is paging to the @code{less} program, the @samp{-p} option is forced
instead of the @samp{-t} option, taking advantage of the fact that
@code{less} recognizes overstrike sequences and renders them
appropriately on the user screen.

On a final note, options @samp{-p}, @samp{-t}, @samp{-[1234]} are not
mutually exclusive.  If you use many of them, you will merely accumulate
the effect of each.

@node Examples, Problems, Invoking wdiff, Top
@chapter How some people used @code{wdiff}

This section will contain user-contributed examples.

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{troff} example.

By Paul Fox, @samp{pgf@@cayman.com}.

Using @code{wdiff}, with some @code{troff}-specific delimiters gives
@emph{much} better output.  The delimeters I used (extra shell-quoting
removed for clarity) :

@example
wdiff -d -1\s-5 -2\s0 -3\fB -4\fP
@end example

This makes the pointsize of deletions 5 points smaller than normal, and
emboldens insertions.  Fantastic!

I experimented with

@example
wdiff -d -1\fI -2\fP -3\fB -4\fP
@end example

since that's more like the defaults you use for terminals/printers, but
since I actually use italics for emphasis in my documents, I thought the
point size thing was clearer.

I tried it on code, and it works surprisingly well there, too...

@end itemize

@node Problems,  , Examples, Top
@chapter Reporting Bugs

If you find a bug in @code{wdiff}, please send electronic mail to
@w{@samp{pinard@@iro.umontreal.ca}}.  Include the version number, which
you can find by running @w{@samp{wdiff --version}}.  Include in your
message sufficient input to reproduce the problem and also, the output
you expected.

Here are some received, unprocessed suggestions.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Make an MSDOS port.

@item
Select by options exactly what is whitespace.

@item
Have a @code{wpatch} program.  I do not see good ways of doing this.
Any ideas?  Suggested by Zhuo Zang <zzang@@stat.ufl.edu>, August 13'th,
1992.
@end itemize

@bye
