.\" Copyright 1996 Derek B. Noonburg
.TH pdftops 1 "14 Aug 2000"
.SH NAME
pdftops \- Portable Document Format (PDF) to PostScript converter
(version 0.91)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pdftops
[options]
.RI [ PDF-file
.RI [ PS-file ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pdftops
converts Portable Document Format (PDF) files to PostScript so they
can be printed.
.PP
Pdftops reads the PDF file,
.IR PDF-file ,
and writes a PostScript file,
.IR PS-file .
If
.I PS-file
is not specified, pdftops converts
.I file.pdf
to
.I file.ps
(or
.I file.eps
with the -eps option).  If 
.I PS-file
is \'-', the PostScript is sent to stdout.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-f " number"
Specifies the first page to print.
.TP
.BI \-l " number"
Specifies the last page to print.
.TP
.BI \-paperw " size"
Set the paper width, in points.
.TP
.BI \-paperh " size"
Set the paper height, in points.
.TP
.B \-level1
Generate Level 1 PostScript.  The resulting PostScript files will be
significantly larger (if they contain images), but will print on Level
1 printers.  This also converts all images to black and white.  The
default behavior is to generate Level 2 PostScript.  In particular,
Level 2 supports color images and image compression.
.TP
.B \-eps
Generate an Encapsulated PostScript (EPS) file.  An EPS file contains
a single image, so if you use this option with a multi-page PDF file,
you must use -f and -l to specify a single page.
.TP
.B \-opi
Generate OPI comments for all images and forms which have OPI
information.  (This option is only available if pdftops was compiled
with OPI support.)
.TP
.B \-noemb
By default, any Type 1 fonts which are embedded in the PDF file are
copied into the PostScript file.  This option causes pdftops to
substitute base fonts instead.  Embedded fonts make PostScript files
larger, but may be necessary for readable output.
.TP
.B \-form
Generate a PostScript form which can be imported by software that
understands forms.  Only one page is converted (since forms cannot
contain multiple pages) and the -l option is ignored.  The -level1
option cannot be used with -form.
.TP
.BI \-upw " password"
Specify the user password for the PDF file.
.TP
.B \-q
Don't print any messages or errors.
.TP
.B \-v
Print copyright and version information.
.TP
.B \-h
Print usage information.
.RB ( \-help
is equivalent.)
.SH BUGS
No support for TrueType and Type 3 fonts.
.SH AUTHOR
The pdftops software and documentation are copyright 1996-2000 Derek
B. Noonburg (derekn@foolabs.com).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR xpdf (1),
.BR pdftotext (1),
.BR pdfinfo (1),
.BR pdftopbm (1),
.BR pdfimages (1)
.br
.B http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/
