.\" Copyright 1996 Derek B. Noonburg
.TH xpdf 1 "14 Aug 2000"
.SH NAME
xpdf \- Portable Document Format (PDF) file viewer for X (version 0.91)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xpdf
[options]
.RI [ PDF-file
.RI [ page ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Xpdf
is a viewer for Portable Document Format (PDF) files.  (These are also
sometimes also called \'Acrobat' files, from the name of Adobe's PDF
software.)  Xpdf runs under the X Window System on UNIX, VMS, and
OS/2.
.PP
To run xpdf, simply type:
.PP
.RS
xpdf file.pdf
.RE
.PP
where
.I file.pdf
is your PDF file.  The file name can be followed by a number
specifying the page which should be displayed first, e.g.:
.PP
.RS
xpdf file.pdf 18
.RE
.PP
You can also start xpdf without opening any files:
.PP
.RS
xpdf
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
X resources are listed in square brackets with the corresponding
option.
.TP
.BI \-z " zoom"
Set the initial zoom factor.  A number (-5 .. 5) specifies a zoom
factor, where 0 means 72 dpi.  You may also specify \'page', to fit
the page to the window size, or \'width', to fit the page width to the
window width.
.RB [ xpdf.initialZoom ]
.TP
.BI \-g " geometry"
Set the initial window geometry.
.RB ( \-geometry
is equivalent.)
.RB [ xpdf.geometry ]
.TP
.BI \-remote " name"
Start/contact xpdf remote server with specified name (see the
.B "REMOTE SERVER MODE"
section below).
.TP
.B \-raise
Raise xpdf remote server window (with -remote only).
.TP
.B \-quit
Kill xpdf remote server (with -remote only).
.TP
.B \-cmap
Install a private colormap.  This is ignored on TrueColor visuals.
.RB [ xpdf.installCmap ]
.TP
.BI \-rgb " number"
Set the size of largest RGB cube xpdf will try to allocate.  The
default is 5 (for a 5x5x5 cube); set to a smaller number to conserve
color table entries.  This is ignored with private colormaps and on
TrueColor visuals.
.TP
.BI \-papercolor " color"
Set the "paper color", i.e., the background of the page display.  This
will not work too well with PDF files that do things like filling in
white behind the text.
.RB [ xpdf.paperColor ]
.TP
.B \-eucjp
When copying text, convert Japanese text to EUC-JP.  This is currently
the only option for converting Japanese text -- the only effect is to
switch to 7-bit ASCII for non-Japanese text, in order to fit into the
EUC-JP encoding.  (This option is only available if pdftotext was
compiled with Japanese support.)
.RB [ xpdf.eucjp ]
.TP
.BI \-t1lib " font-type"
Set the type of font rendering for t1lib (the Type 1 rasterizer) to
use.  Options are \'none' (don't use t1lib at all), \'plain' (use
non-anti-aliased fonts), \'low' or \'high' (use low-level or
high-level anti-aliased fonts).
.RB [ xpdf.t1libControl ]
.TP
.BI \-freetype " font-type"
Set the type of font rendering for FreeType (the TrueType rasterizer)
to use.  Options are \'none' (don't use FreeType at all), \'plain'
(use non-anti-aliased fonts), or \'aa' (use anti-aliased fonts).
.RB [ xpdf.freeTypeControl ]
.TP
.BI \-ps " PS-file"
Set the default file name for PostScript output.  This can also be of
the form \'|command' to pipe the PostScript through a command.
.RB [ xpdf.psFile ]
.TP
.BI \-paperw " size"
Set the paper width, in points.
.RB [ xpdf.psPaperWidth ]
.TP
.BI \-paperh " size"
Set the paper height, in points.
.RB [ xpdf.psPaperHeight ]
.TP
.B \-level1
Generate Level 1 PostScript.  The resulting PostScript files will be
significantly larger (if they contain images), but will print on Level
1 printers.  This also converts all images to black and white.
.RB [ xpdf.psLevel1 ]
.TP
.BI \-upw " password"
Specify the user password for the PDF file.
.TP
.B \-fullscreen
Open xpdf in a full-screen mode, useful for presentations.  You may
also want to specify '-bg black' (or similar) with this.  (There is
currently no way to switch between window and full-screen modes on the
fly.)
.TP
.B \-cmd
Print commands as they're executed (useful for debugging).
.TP
.B \-q
Don't print any messages or errors.
.TP
.B \-v
Print copyright and version information.
.TP
.B \-h
Print usage information.
.RB ( \-help
is equivalent.)
.PP
Several other standard X options and resources will work as expected:
.TP
.BI \-display " display"
.RB [ xpdf.display ]
.TP
.BI \-fg " color"
.RB ( \-foreground
is equivalent.)
.RB [ xpdf.foreground ]
.TP
.BI \-bg " color"
.RB ( \-background
is equivalent.)
.RB [ xpdf.background ]
.TP
.BI \-font " font"
.RB ( \-fn
is equivalent.)
.RB [ xpdf.font ]
.PP
The color and font options only affect the user interface elements,
not the PDF display (the \'paper').
.PP
The following X resources do not have command line option equivalents:
.TP
.B xpdf.urlCommand
Set the command executed when you click on a URL link.  See the
.B "WEB BROWSERS"
section below for details.
.TP
.B xpdf.japaneseFont
Sets the X font name pattern to use for Japanese text.  The default
is:
.PP
.RS
-*-fixed-medium-r-normal-*-%s-*-*-*-*-*-jisx0208.1983-0
.RE
.TP
.B xpdf.chineseFont
Sets the X font name pattern to use for Chinese text.  The default is:
.PP
.RS
-*-fangsong ti-medium-r-normal-*-%s-*-*-*-*-*-gb2312.1980-0
.RE
.TP
.B xpdf.viKeys
Enables the \'h', \'l', \'k' and \'j' keys for left, right, up, and
down scrolling.
.PP
The following resources set the file names of the Type 1 fonts to use
for the Base 14 fonts:
.PP
.RS
.B xpdf.t1TimesRoman
.br
.B xpdf.t1TimesItalic
.br
.B xpdf.t1TimesBold
.br
.B xpdf.t1TimesBoldItalic
.br
.B xpdf.t1Helvetica
.br
.B xpdf.t1HelveticaOblique
.br
.B xpdf.t1HelveticaBold
.br
.B xpdf.t1HelveticaBoldOblique
.br
.B xpdf.t1Courier
.br
.B xpdf.t1CourierOblique
.br
.B xpdf.t1CourierBold
.br
.B xpdf.t1CourierBoldOblique
.br
.B xpdf.t1Symbol
.br
.B xpdf.t1ZapfDingbats
.RE
.PP
If t1lib is enabled, these Type 1 fonts will be used instead of X
server fonts.
.SH CONTROLS
.SS On-screen controls, at the bottom of the xpdf window
.TP
.B "left/right arrow buttons"
Move to the previous/next page.
.TP
.B "double left/right arrow buttons"
Move backward or forward by ten pages.
.TP
.B "dashed left/right arrow buttons"
Move backward or forward along the history path.
.TP
.B "\'Page' entry box"
Move to a specific page number.  Click in the box to activate it, type
the page number, then hit return.
.TP
.B "zoom popup menu"
Change the zoom factor (see the description of the -z option above).
.TP
.B "binoculars button"
Find a text string.
.TP
.B "print button"
Bring up a dialog for generating a PostScript file.  The dialog has
options to set the pages to be printed and the PostScript file name.
The file name can be \'-' for stdout or \'|command' to pipe the
PostScript through a command, e.g., \'|lpr'.
.TP
.B "\'?' button"
Bring up the \'about xpdf' window.
.TP
.B "link info"
The space between the \'?' and \'Quit' buttons is used to show the URL
or external file name when the mouse is over a link.
.TP
.B "\'Quit' button"
Quit xpdf.
.PP
.SS Menu
Pressing the right mouse button will post a popup menu with the
following commands:
.TP
.B "Open..."
Open a new PDF file via a file requester.
.TP
.B "Reload"
Reload the current PDF file.  Note that Xpdf will reload the file
automatically (on a page change or redraw) if it has changed since it
was last loaded.
.TP
.B "Save as..."
Save the current file via a file requester.
.TP
.B "Rotate left"
Rotate the page 90 degrees counterclockwise.
.TP
.B "Rotate right"
Rotate the page 90 degrees clockwise.  The two rotate commands are
intended primarily for PDF files where the rotation isn't correctly
specified in the file, but they're also useful if your X server
doesn't support font rotation.
.TP
.B "Quit"
Quit xpdf.
.PP
.SS Text selection
Dragging the mouse with the left button held down will highlight an
arbitrary rectangle.  Any text inside this rectangle will be copied to
the X selection buffer.
.PP
.SS Links
Clicking on a hyperlink will jump to the link's destination.  A link
to another PDF document will make xpdf load that document.  A
\'launch' link to an executable program will display a dialog, and if
you click \'ok', execute the program.  URL links call an external
command (see the
.B WEB BROWSERS
section below).
.PP
.SS Panning
Dragging the mouse with the middle button held down pans the window.
.PP
.SS Key bindings
.TP
.B o
Open a new PDF file via a file requester.
.TP
.B f
Find a text string.
.TP
.B n
Move to the next page.
.TP
.B p
Move to the previous page.
.TP
.BR <Space> " or " <PageDown> " or " <Next>
Scroll down on the current page; if already at bottom, move to next
page.
.TP
.BR <Backspace> " or " <Delete> " or " <PageUp> " or " <Previous>
Scroll up on the current page; if already at top, move to previous
page.
.TP
.B <Home>
Scroll to top of current page.
.TP
.B <End>
Scroll to bottom of current page.
.TP
.B arrows
Scroll the current page.
.TP
.B control-L
Redraw the current page.
.TP
.B q
Quit xpdf.
.SH "WEB BROWSERS"
If you want to run xpdf automatically from netscape or mosaic (and
probably other browsers) when you click on a link to a PDF file, you
need to edit (or create) the files
.I .mime.types
and
.I .mailcap
in your home directory.  In
.I .mime.types
add the line:
.PP
.RS
application/pdf pdf
.RE
.PP
In
.I .mailcap
add the lines:
.PP
.RS
# Use xpdf to view PDF files.
.RE
.RS
application/pdf; xpdf -q %s
.RE
.PP
Make sure that xpdf is on your executable search path.
.PP
When you click on a URL link in a PDF file, xpdf will execute the
command specified by the xpdf.urlCommand resource, replacing an
occurrence of \'%s' with the URL.  For example, to call netscape with
the URL, use this resource setting:
.PP
.RS
xpdf.urlCommand: netscape -remote 'openURL(%s)'
.RE
.SH "REMOTE SERVER MODE"
Xpdf can be started in remote server mode by specifying a server name
(in addition to the file name and page number).  For example:
.PP
.RS
xpdf -remote myServer file.pdf
.RE
.PP
If there is currently no xpdf running in server mode with the name
\'myServer', a new xpdf window will be opened.  If another command:
.PP
.RS
xpdf -remote myServer another.pdf 9
.RE
.PP
is issued, a new copy of xpdf will not be started.  Instead, the first
xpdf (the server) will load
.I another.pdf
and display page nine.  If the file name is the same:
.PP
.RS
xpdf -remote myServer another.pdf 4
.RE
.PP
the xpdf server will simply display the specified page.
.PP
The -raise option tells the server to raise its window; it can be
specified with or without a file name and page number.
.PP
The -quit option tells the server to close its window and exit.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
Xpdf will read a file called
.I .xpdfrc
from your home directory (if it exists).  This file can contain two
types of entries.
.TP
.BI fontpath " directory"
Look for Type 1 fonts in
.IR directory .
Xpdf uses this only to get the font encoding.  For display, the font
must also be mapped with a
.B fontmap
entry.
.TP
.BI fontmap " PDF-font" "" " X-font"
Map
.I PDF-font
(as referenced in a PDF file) to
.IR X-font ,
which should be a standard X font descriptor with \'%s' in the pixel
size position.
.PP
For example, use:
.PP
.RS
fontmap TimesCE-Roman -*-times-medium-r-*-*-%s-*-*-*-*-*-iso8859-2
.RE
.PP
to map the Central European (Latin-2) version of the Times-Roman
font.  This assumes that you've installed the appropriate X fonts (see
.BR mkfontdir (1)).
Xpdf knows about the ISO8859-2 encoding, so you don't need a
.B fontpath
entry for these fonts.
To use the Bakoma Type 1 fonts, do this:
.PP
.RS
fontpath /home/derekn/fonts/bakoma
.br
fontmap cmb10 -bakoma-cmb10-medium-r-normal--%s-*-*-*-p-*-adobe-fontspecific
.br
fontmap cmbsy10 -bakoma-cmbsy10-medium-r-normal--%s-*-*-*-p-*-adobe-fontspecific
.br
etc...
.RE
.PP
This assumes that the Type 1 font files are available in the directory
.IR /home/derekn/fonts/bakoma .
.SH BUGS
No support for TrueType and Type 3 fonts.
.SH AUTHOR
The xpdf software and documentation are copyright 1996-2000 Derek
B. Noonburg (derekn@foolabs.com).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pdftops (1),
.BR pdftotext (1),
.BR pdfinfo (1),
.BR pdftopbm (1),
.BR pdfimages (1)
.br
.B http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/
