.\" @(#)slattach.1	1.7 (13 Oct 1993)
.\"..........................................................................
.\" Copyright 1993, Jim Avera.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" 
.\" This file contains new material owned by the above copyright holder, and
.\" may also contain portions derived from existing works used by permission.
.\"
.\" You are prohibited from copying, distributing, modifying, or using this
.\" file (or the portions owned by the above copyright holder) except as 
.\" described in the file "COPYRIGHT" which accompanies this program.
.\"..........................................................................
.\" 
.\"
.\"             Copyright 1991, Intel Corporation
.\"                   All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
.\" its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and
.\" that both the copyright notice appear in all copies and that both
.\" the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of Intel Corporation
.\" not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution
.\" of the software without specific, written prior permission.
.\" 
.\" COMPANY AND/OR INTEL DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO
.\" EVENT SHALL COMPANY NOR INTEL BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL,
.\" INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER
.\" RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTUOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\" 
.\" TSLIP: Changes for auto-dial support added by Jim Avera (jima@netcom.com)
.\"
.TH "slattach" 1M "TCP/IP"
.SH NAME
slattach \- assign serial line as a SLIP interface.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBslattach -a\fP "[:bg cmds:] cu parameters" [\fB-t\fP timeout] [\fB-p\fP] interface_name
\fBslattach -d\fP [\fB-p\fP] [\fB-i\fP] device_name interface_name [ baudrate ]
\fBslattach\fP [\fB-p\fP] \fB\(em\fP interface_name [ process_id ]
.fi
.PP
This program is part of TSLIP 2.3
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Slattach
is used to assign a serial line as a network interface
using the 
.I TSLIP
(Serial Link Internet Protocol) driver.
.PP
.B -p 
(persistent) means use persistent streams links when attaching slip
to the ip driver, and exit immediately.
Otherwise the
process sleeps until killed or receiving a signal, at which time
the stream is dismantled and the serial port is freed.
.PP
Persistently-linked drivers are effectively permanent (until a reboot)
and do not require that the slattach process remain in existence.
.PP
.B -a 
(auto-connect) arranges to automatically dial out on demand using the
given parameter string, which must contain arguments identical to
those used by the Taylor "cu" program.  Usually the parameter is just 
a \fIsystem\fP name, but might be something 
like "-l\fIttyname\fP -s\fIspeed\fP".
.PP
Initially the slip interface is created without any device linked below it.  
When traffic appears, the
.I slipd
daemon is notified.  The daemon auto-dials and dynamically links a device 
under the slip interface.
Optional :-delimited background commands may preceed the dialing arguments.
These commands are run by the daemon each time the dial-up connection is 
established.  See \fIslipd\fP(1M).  
The last background command must end with a ':', followed by cu arguments.
.PP
.B -t 
(auto-connect idle timeout) specifies an idle timeout value in seconds, 
used only with \fB-a\fP.  The connection is droppped if no traffic flows for 
this period, but will be transparently restored if needed.  Zero disables
timeouts.  Without \fB-t\fP a default timeout is used.  
.PP
.B -d 
[backward compatibility].
The indicated tty device is immediately opened and linked under the slip 
driver.  Taylor uucp code is not used.  The resulting interface remains 
available until the process exits (or forever, with \fB-p\fP).
This is useful for permanent direct links or for testing.
For dial-up connections, use \fB-a\fP.
.PP
.B -i 
means ignore SIGHUP.  Ordinarily (and without \fB-p\fP) the process 
catches SIGHUP and then exits.
.BB
.B - 
by itself means to link the current \fIstdin\fP device as the 
slip device.  This is used by the "slip" program to start
a slip session from an ordinary dial-in session.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
slattach -p -a "venus" sl0
slattach -p -a "-d saturn" sl0

slattach -d -i  /dev/tty00 sl0 19200
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.nf
slipd(1M), slip(1), asy(7), ip(7), tslip(7)
\fIAdvanced System Administration Guide\fP.
.fi
.SH AUTHORS
Sudji Husodo, Jim Avera
