.\" @(#)slipd.1	1.7 (13 Oct 1993)
.\" ..........................................................................
.\" . Copyright 1993, Jim Avera.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" . 
.\" . This program contains new material owned by the above copyright holder,
.\" . and may also contain portions derived from existing works used according
.\" . to permission granted by the owners of those works.
.\" .
.\" . You are prohibited from copying, distributing, modifying, or using this
.\" . file (or the portions owned by the above copyright holder) except as 
.\" . described in the file "COPYRIGHT" which accompanies this program.
.\" ...........................................................................
.\"
.TH slipd 1M "TCP/IP"
.SH NAME
slipd \- SLIP auto-dial and hangup daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBslipd\fP [\fB-v\fP] [\fB-s \fP\fI/dev/tslip\fP]
.br
\fBslipd\fP [\fB-v\fP] [\fB-s \fP\fI/dev/tslip\fP] \fB-c\fP \fIifcname\fP
.fi
.PP
This program is part of TSLIP 2.3
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
With \fB-c\fP, slipd is not a daemon but merely checks the status of the 
specified interface and exits with the following status:
.sp 0.5
.in +0.4i
0 - A dial-up link is currently established for slip interface \fIifcname\fP.
.br
1 - No link exists for interface \fIifcname\fP (auto-dial would occur if used)
.br
2 - An error occurred (e.g., \fIifcname\fP is not configured, or the
tslip driver is not installed).
.in -0.4i
.sp 0.5
.PP
Without \fB-c\fP, slipd becomes the slip auto-dial daemon, unless another
daemon process is already registered with the tslip driver.
.PP
The slip driver (which is interposed between ip and 
serial line drivers) sends messages to the daemon to perform auto-dial
functions.
.PP
An auto-dial parameter string for each slip interface is stored in the driver 
by \fIslattach\fP(1), and sent to slipd in connection-request messages.
A parameter string has the following format:
.PP
\h'.5i'[ :bg-cmd-list: ] dialing-args...
.PP
\fIbg-cmd-list\fP is a optional \fB:\fP-separated list of commands to be run 
in background after the link is established.  These commands may do work
which uses the slip link but which is not important enough to initiate a
dial-out.  Typically \fIbg-cmd-list\fP is "slipcmd -r ifcname", which runs 
commands queued by "slipcmd -q cmd...".  See \fIslipcmd\fP(1) for details.
.PP 
\fIdialing-args\fP are used to make the connection, and have the same form 
as areguments to "cu", typically just a system name  or "-d system" to log
dialing commands.  No ':' characters are allowed.
.PP
.B -v
enables logging of events to stderr.
.PP
.B -s 
specifies an alternate device file for contacting the slip driver.
.SH SEE ALSO
.nf
slattach(1), slipcmd(1).
.fi
.SH AUTHOR
Jim Avera (jima@netcom.com)  June, 1993
