.\" @(#)slipcmd.1	1.5 (13 Oct 1993)
.\" ..........................................................................
.\" . Copyright 1993, Jim Avera.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" . 
.\" . This program contains new material owned by the above copyright holder,
.\" . and may also contain portions derived from existing works used according
.\" . to permission granted by the owners of those works.
.\" .
.\" . You are prohibited from copying, distributing, modifying, or using this
.\" . file (or the portions owned by the above copyright holder) except as 
.\" . described in the file "COPYRIGHT" which accompanies this program.
.\" ...........................................................................
.\"
.TH slipcmd 1M TCP/IP
.SH NAME
slipcmd \- Run or queue commands using a dial-up slip link
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBslipcmd\fP [\fB-q\fP] [\fB-r\fP] [\fB-v\fP] [\fB-s \fP\fI/dev/tslip\fP] \fIifcname\fP [cmd args...]
.fi
.PP
This program is part of TSLIP 2.3
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Slipcmd
runs or queues a command depending on whether a dial-up slip link 
is currently connected.
.PP
.B -q 
defers the command if the link is not currently established 
(i.e., no modem connection exists, even though IP believes the network
interface is up).  If the same command is attempted several times, only 
a single entry will be made in the deferred-work queue.
.PP
.B -r 
immediately runs the command and any queued commands, regardless of link status.
.PP
With neither \fB-q\fP or \fB-r\fP, the command is executed if the link
is currently active, and otherwise ignored.
.PP
.B -v 
causes logging to stderr.
.PP
To run deferred work whenever the link is established for some other 
reason, specify slipcmd -r as a "background command" in the parameter
string for \fIslattach\fP (i.e., slattach -a ":slipcmd -r sl0: \fIdialing args...\fP").
The slip dialing daemon (slipd) will then execute it whenever the link is 
established, causing any deferred work to be done at that time.
.PP
Typically, work like polling a mail server is frequently attempted from cron
using "slipcmd -q ifcname cmd...", and occasionally "slipcmd -r ifcname" is 
run to force execution of any deferred work even if a dial-out is required.
.PP
.SH "EXIT VALUE"
0 if the command ran immediately (regardless of it's result).
.br
1 if the command was discarded or (with -q) queued.
.br
Other values indicate an error occurred.
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
slattach(1M), slipd(1M), tslip(7)
.SH AUTHOR
Jim Avera (jima@netcom.com) June, 1993
