.\" $Id: psf.1,v 3.5 1992/06/02 08:17:01 ajf Exp ajf $
.TH PSF 1 ""
.SH NAME
psf \- postscript filter

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B psf
[
.B -1|2|4
] [
.B -a
] [
.B -A
.I acct.fil
] [
.B -b
.I n
] [
.B -c
.I n
] 
    [
.B -d
] [
.B -D
] [
.B -e
] [
.B -E
] [
.B -f
.I n
] [
.B -g
.I type
] 
    [
.B -h
] [
.B -H
.I text
] [
.B -I
] [
.B -i
.I n[,pic]
] [
.B -j
] [
.B -l
.I n
] 
    [
.B -L
.I n
] [
.B -m
.I n[,pic]
]  [
.B -M
.I lm,rm,tm,bm[,pci]
] [
.B -n
] 
    [
.B -P
.I n
] [
.B -p
.I n
] [
.B -R
.I n
] [
.B -r
.I n
] [
.B -s 
] [
.B -t
.I n
] 
    [
.B -u
.I f.def
] [
.B -v
] [
.B -w 
] [
.B -x
] 
    [
.B -Y
.I host
] [
.B -y
.I user
] [
.B -z
]
.I file...

 where -1|2|4    print 1,2 or 4 up on a page (default = 1)
       -a        spooler filter has read access to stdout
       -A a.fil  name of accounting file (for lpsched)
       -b n      select paper bin n
       -c n      print columns (based on Courier font)
       -D        print double sided in duplex mode
       -d        allow double sided printing
       -e        left-justified line wrap for long lines
       -E        right-justified line wrap for long lines
       -f n      font number/name (default = 0 = Courier)
       -g type   page type (default = letter)
       -h        put file name as header on each page
       -H text   put text as header on each page
       -i n[pic] indent left margin n points/inch/cm
       -I        enable/disable ISO Latin1 encoding
       -j        generate a ctl/d at end of print job
       -l n      print lines per page
       -L n      page length in lines
       -m n[pic] indent top margin in points/inch/cm
       -M xxx    set all margins
       -n        set portrait (narrow) format
       -O pipe   send output to pipe (spooler only)
       -p n      set point size to n
       -P n      set point size to n, preserve point size
       -R n      remove n lines from beginning of file
       -r n      remove n lines between pages
       -s        show page stats (line+column count)
       -t n      set tabs to n (default = 8)
       -u f.def  use this printer definition file
       -v        print pages in reverse
       -w        set landscape (wide) format
       -x        draw cross with 4-up page
       -Y host   host name for lpsched filter
       -y user   user id for lpsched filter
       -z        force postscript translate (spooler only)
       file..    name of files to be printed (or stdin)

   Fonts selection with -f n  (printer dependent)
       0 Courier               1 Helvetica
       2 Times-Roman           3 AvantGarde-Book
       4 Bookman-Light         5 NewCenturySchlbk-Roman
       6 Palatino-Roman        7 Helvetical-Narrow
       8 Garamond-Light        9 Korinna-Regular
       a Helvetica-Condensed   b ZapfChancery-MediumItalic
.fi
.bp
.SH DESCRIPTION

.I Psf
filters text files for display on postscript printers.
Text may be "1-up", "2-up", or "4-up" on a page. 
.I Psf
is a general purpose filter for most text and programme listings.  By
using various escape sequences (described below), any portion of the text
may be printed in different fonts and at different point sizes.

If "letter" sized paper is used, the page is assumed to have 63 lines and
80 columns wide.  For "legal" sized paper, the effective size is 81 lines
by 80 columns.  These dimensions account for the "print region" (excluding
margins) of the page.

The actual number of print lines and characters per line may be
over-ridden by specifying suitable options.

The most commonly used options are page rotation, 
setting point size, column count and line count:
all of which allow you to place more printed information on a page.
Additional options are for special formatting purposes and may be
used if desired.

By default, lines wider than the page width are truncated.
Line wrap may be enabled with the
.B -e
option.

Special formatting for 
.I nroff'ed
documents and mail box
printing are encapsulated in shell scripts such as
.I psfnroff
and
.I psfmbox.
These scripts hide some of the more complex options.

.SH EXAMPLES

General text may be printed with a command such as:
.nf

	psf this.file that.fil | lp
.fi

If page rotation and print scaling
is desired, typical commands are:

.nf
    psf -                  (show help information)
    psf my.file my2.fil    (normal print)
    psf -2  my.file        (print 2 up on a page)
    psf -2xn my.c          (typical source listing)
    psf -4x my.file        (print 4 up on a page)
    psf -p8 my.fil         (print 8 point)
    psf -l66 -c132 -w a.b  (print 66 lines, 132 cols, landscape)
    psf -M 1,1,1,1,c a.b   (set 1 cm margins)
.fi

.SH PRINT SIZE
Two ways are available to adjust the print size.
If the
.B point size
(using the
.B -p
option) is used, choosing a smaller point
size than the default of 12 results in smaller letters and more
printed lines.
Choosing a larger points size results in larger letters and reduces
the number of printed lines and columns on a page.

A table of various point sizes, page sizes and their associated
line and column count is printed with:

.nf
      psf -s
.fi

If the
.B column count (-c)
or the
.B line count (-l)
is adjusted, the number of printed rows and columns can be changed
form the defaults for the paper size.
For example, a 132 column, 60 line page in landscape layout
may be selected with:

.nf
      psf -w -c132 -l60 my.fil | lp
.fi

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-1\|2\|4
Specify the number of logical pages that are to be printed
on a physical page.  By default, 
.I psf
will print one logical page per physical page.  

If two logical pages are specified
with 
.B -2
, then two pages are printed in "landscape" format:

.nf
      +-----------+-----------+
      |           |           |
      |   pg 1    |   pg 2    |
      |           |           |
      +-----------+-----------+
.fi

If two-up printing in portrait layout is desired, use
.I -2n
(i.e. two up, narrow).  On letter sized paper this gives
two logical pages: each is 80 columns by 126 lines.
This layout may be preferred for programme listing.


If four logical pages are specified with 
.B -4
, then the pages
are printed in "portrait format:

.nf
      +-----------+-----------+
      |           |           |
      |   pg 1    |   pg 2    |
      |           |           |
      +-----------+-----------+
      |           |           |
      |   pg 3    |   pg 4    |
      |           |           |
      +-----------+-----------+
.fi

Each logical page printed in 2-up or 4-up format contains the same number
of lines and print columns as if it were printed in 1-up portrait format.
The characters may be compressed or expanded horizontally to fill to the
logical page width.  For example, printing with:

.nf
       psf -4 my.text | lp
.fi

creates four miniature pages, each of which would contain 63 print
lines and 80 characters on a line.

Printing 2-up or 4-up preserves the number of lines on a logical printed
paged. Identical results (in terms of lines and columns on a logical
page) are realized with 1-up, 2-up or 4-up printing.

Clipping is performed in 2-up and 4-up printing.  If the line lengths on
the left half of the page exceed the logical page width, the lines will
be truncated.

.TP
.B \-a
If psf is used as part of a spooler filter and the filter has
read access to stdout, then the
.B -a
option allows the filter to read the actual number of pages
printed from the printer.  If this option is not provided,
the computed number of pages wll be written to the log file.

.TP
.B -A acct.fil
If psf is used as part of the lpsched spooling system, the
specified file is used to record the accounting information.

.TP
.B \-b n
Select paper bin 
.I n.
If this option is not specified, the
default paper bin is used.

.TP
.B \-c n
Sets the number of print columns on a line.  The character width is based
on the Courier font (10 pitch, character width of 7.2 points).  The text
is scaled to print the desired number of characters over the entire page
width.  Setting the character count does NOT alter the number of print
lines.

The option 
.B -c40
on letter sized paper
horizontally elongates the characters to twice normal width.
Similarly, 
.B -c160
on letter size paper compresses the characters
to one half normal width.

.TP
.B \-D
Use the printer's native duplex mode for double-sided printing.
Book format is not supported in this mode.

.TP
.B \-d
Prepare for double sided printing.  The resulting print stream
is written to
.I psfbook.psd
which must be subsequently filtered with 
.I psfdoub.
Refer to the man page for
.I psfdoub
for operational details.

.TP
.B \-e
By default, lines longer than the page width are truncated.
This option enables line wrap: long lines will cascade onto
successive print lines.  Each wrapped portion of the line
is left-justified.

.TP
.B \-E
This operates similar to
.B -e
however each wrapped portion of the line
is right-justified:   the end of the wrapped portion
of the line is placed at the right paper margin.

.TP
.B \-f n
Any of the standard postscript 
fonts may be selected in lieu
of the default Courier.  These are selected from the following
table:
.nf

         0 Courier
         1 Helvetica
         2 Times-Roman
         3 AvantGarde-Book
         4 Bookman-Light
         5 NewCenturySchlbk-Roman
         6 Palatino-Roman
         7 Helvetica-Narrow
         8 Garamond-Light
         9 Korinna-Regular
         a Helvetica-Condensed
         b ZapfChancery-MediumItalic
.fi

The target printer may not have exactly these fonts.  To see which
fonts are configured, display the psf usage information with:

.nf
	psf -
.fi

Since Courier is the only fixed-pitch font, it is usually used for
printing of man pages or programme listings.  The other fonts are
proportionally spaced.

The selected font becomes the new "default font".

The font may be specified either by the font number or the font name.  For
example, the Courier font could be selected with either option '-f 0' 
or '-f Courier'.  If the selection is by name, then only a few of the
characters of the name must be provided.  The NewCenturySchlbk-Roman font
could be selected with the option '-f New'.

.TP
.B \-g type
Sets the working paper type.  The 
.I type
may be one of
the following with the default number of lines and
columns (assuming 12 point, 10 pitch Courier characters):

.nf
        type       lines     columns
       -------     -----     -------
       letter       63         80
       legal        81         80
       a4           67         78
       b5           58         67
.fi

The number of lines/columns represents the number of possible
lines/columns in the printable region of the postscript printer -
exclusive of the unprintable margin area.

.TP
.B \-h
The file name, page number and current date are printed at
the top of each page.  The point size is automatically scaled to
permit the specified number of text lines to be printed to account
for the additional two lines consumed by the title line.

.TP
.B \-H text
Place a header (like 
.B -h
) however use 
.I text
rather than the filename.

.TP
.B \-j
generates a ctl/d at the end of a print job.  If 
.I psf
is used at the command line or within a shell script,
a ctl/d is not generated at the end of a print job: this option
forces the generation.

.TP
.B \-I
Enable or disable the use of ISO Latin1 character set encoding.
If
.I psf
was compiled to use ISO Latin1 encoding by default, the
.B -I
option reverts to standard encoding.  If
.I psf
was compiled to use standard encoding, the
.B -I
option enables ISO Latin1 encoding.

.TP
.B \-i n[pic]
Indent the physical page's left margin by 
.I n
points
.B (p)
, inches 
.B (i)
or centimeters
.B (c).
Text is scaled by the amount of the indentation to preserve
nominal line and column counts.
This is useful to offset the left margin for binding or hole-punch.

If indentation is desired without causing scaling (i.e. a true "offset"
only), then a point size must be selected with
.B -P.

	psf -i2c -P12 doc.file | lpr

.TP
.B \-l n
Sets the number of printed lines per page.  The default is 63 lines for
letter sized paper.  If more than 63 lines per page are specified, the
point size is automatically reduced to accommodate the line count.

The number of printed lines specified by 
.B -l
may be less than
the number of possible print lines specified by 
.B -L.
For example,
the default total number of print lines is 63 (as though you
had specified 
.B -L63
).  If you used the option 
.B -l20
, then only
the first 20 lines of the possible 63 would be printed.  A skip to new
page would be performed for the 21st line and the remainder
of the page would be blank.

.TP
.B \-L n
Specifies the number of possible print lines available on the page.
If 
.B -L
is
specified, then the page scale is adjusted to accommodate the
line count.   However, only the number of lines specified by the
.B -l
option will actually print.

.TP
.B \-m n[pic]
Move the physical page's top margin down by 
.I n
points
.B (p)
, inches 
.B (i)
or centimeters
.B (c).
Text is scaled by the amount of the indentation to
preserve nominal line and column counts.
This is useful to offset the top margin for binding or hole-punch.

.TP
.B \-M lm,rm,tm,bm[,pic]
All four margins on the each logical page (1,2, or 4 up) 
may be set with the
.B -M
option. The size of the left (lm), right (rm), top (tm) and bottom (bm)
margins may be set in points (p), inches (i) or centimeters (c). 

This option affects each logical page: margins set with
.B -i
or
.B -m
are used to offset physical margins.

For example,

    -M 2,3,4.2,5,c

will set a left margin of 2cm, right margin of 3cm, top margin of 4.2cm
and a bottom margin of 5cm.

If the type of unit is omitted, then "point" is assumed.

Only those margin settings desired need be provided. The missing values
are assumed to be printer defaults. For example, to offset (left margin
only) a page by 1.25 inches, a possible command might be:

     psf -M 1.25,,,,i my.file

Margin sizes are absolute and not scaled when printing in 2-up or 4-up
modes.

Margins to do not cause line clipping:  long text lines may overflow the
right margin.  Line wrap with
.B -e
or
.B -E
may be used to preserve the right margin.

The margin setting could be used in conjunction with the line and column
count to provide positioning within the page. For example, an 80 column
by 60 line page can be centered with 50 point margins with:

     psf -M 50,50,50,50,p -l 60 -c 80 my.file

If margins are set but the line and column count are not provided, the
printing is scaled to use the default number of lines and columns for the
page and point size in use.  Scaling for point size may be defeated
with the
.B -P
.I n
option.

.TP
.B \-n
The page is printed in portrait (narrow) format.  This is the default
for 1-up and 4-up printing.
If portrait layout is desired for 2-up printing, then the 
.B -n
option must be specified.

.TP
.B \-O pipe
The -O option allows psf to open a pipe to another process rather
than sending output to stdout.  This option is effective only for
versions of psf used in a print spooler.

The
.I pipe
is the command (with options) that is to be executed.  For example,

	-O "auxfilter -p17 -t 'sample heading' -v"

Quoted options may be used.

.TP
.B \-p n
Sets the nominal point size to 
.I n
points.  This is accurate only to "1-up" printing.  If "2-up" or "4-up" or
"1-up, landscape" printing is desired, the nominal point size is
automatically scaled.

The selected point size becomes the new "default point size".

Character shape is retained
as much as possible: however margin adjustment with
.B -M,
.B -i,
and
.B -m
do cause general scaling.

Line count set with
.B -l
and column count sent with
.B -c
are honoured, however the point height is preserved.  This may
result in horizontally squashed/elongated characters if the
.B -c
option is used and/or changes in the spacing between lines
if the
.B -l
option is used.

.TP
.B \-P n
Sets the nominal point size to
.I n.
however the point size is not be scaled if the margin
size is adjusted with
.B -M.
.B -i,
or
.B -m.
Scaling still take place in 2-up and 4-up printing.

.TP
.B \-R n
removes
.I n
lines from the beginning of the file.

.TP
.B \-r n
removes
.I n
lines between pages of the file.

Use this option if the text
file has blank lines that must be removed between pages.
For example, a typical "accounting" report may print 60 lines
and 132 columns
of text.  Usually, such reports have two blank lines before 
the first printed text on a page  and 6 blank lines to 
skip to the top of the next page.

To generate exactly 60 printed lines with psf, the first
two blank lines should be removed with
.B -R2
and the blank lines between pages removed with
.B -r6:

.nf
       psf -R2 -r 6 -l 60 -c 132 account.rpt | lp
.fi

The
.B -r
and
.B -R
may be used together as needed.

If a skip to new page was caused by a formfeed imbedded in the
text file, then removal of lines is not performed for that page.

.TP
.B \-s
generates a display of commonly used page layouts, point sizes
and the associated line and column counts for the Courier font.
The display looks like:

.nf
          point size:      8       10       12   
                        lin col  lin col  lin col
   -- Page Layout --    --- ---  --- ---  --- ---
    Letter  portrait:    95 120   76  96   63  80
    Letter landscape:    72 159   57 128   48 106
     Legal  portrait:   122 120   97  96   81  80
     Legal landscape:    72 204   57 164   48 136
        A4  portrait:   101 117   81  94   67  78
        A4 landscape:    70 170   56 136   46 113
        B5  portrait:    87 100   69  80   58  67
        B5 landscape:    60 146   48 117   40  97
.fi

Statistics for point sizes between 6 and 16 are shown.

.TP
.B \-t n
Sets the width of the tab stops.  By default this is set to 8.  If the
first line of a text file contains the string "ta=", then the tab stop
width is automatically determined from this string.  For example, if the
first text line contains "/* ta=4 */" then the tab width is automatically
set to 4.  This feature is useful if programme source files use a tab
space of 4.

.TP
.B \-u f.def
causes the specified file to be used rather than the 
default printer definition file
.I psfprint.def.
If the file cannot be found, the directory containing
the default
.I psfprint.def
file is also searched.

Display the fonts and paper tray assignment applicable to the
alternate .def file with:

	psf -u f.def -\\?

.TP
.B \-v
Print pages in reverse order.

.TP
.B \-w
The page is printed in landscape (wide, horizontal format).
This is the default for 2-up printing.  If 1-up or 4-up printing is
desired in landscape mode, then the 
.B -w
switch must be specified.

.TP
.B \-x
Draws a cross in the to separate the logical pages.  This is
effective for 4-up or 2-up printing.  If 1-up is used,
this option is ignored.

.TP
.B \-Y host
If lpsched is used as the spooler, the specified host
name is used in the printer accounting entry.

.TP
.B \-y user
If lpsched is used as the spooler, the specified user
name is used in the printer accounting entry.

.TP
.B \-z
This option applies to
.I psflpd
use for print filtering with
.I lpr
or
.I psffilter
used for print filtering with
.I lp
spooling systems.
Ascii to postscript translation is forced, even if the
file is already postscript code.  This
allows the printing of a postscript programme.

.SH PSF NOTES

.I Psf
filters text in a "minimally conforming" postscript format (as
specified in the Postscript Language Reference Manual). 

If the text contains escape sequences (possibly generated by 
.I psfbs, psfmail
or a text editor), the escape sequences are analyzed to
perform limited font and underline selection.  The escape sequences
are translated into appropriate postscript code.

The permitted sequences have the
following format:
.nf

        ^E<command>
.fi

The following sequences are recognized:

.nf
         ^EB     begin bold (in current font family)
         ^Eb     end bold
         ^EI     begin italics
         ^Ei     end italics
         ^EU     begin underline
         ^Eu     end underline.
         ^EFn    begin font 'n' (0..9, a..f)
         ^Ef     revert to default font
         ^EPnn   begin point size 'nn' (2 digits)
         ^Ep     revert to default point size
         ^E+     skip 1/2 line forward
         ^E-     skip 1/2 line backward

         "^E" is a true ctrl-E character, not
                the ascii text string "^", "E"
.fi

Note that point sizes with ^EPnn must be two digits such as ^EP07 or ^EP14.

Sequences may be nested: bold, italic, underlined would be 
generated with:
.nf

     ^EB^EI^EUbold, italic and underlined^Eu^Ei^Eb
.fi

Font numbers are consistent across printers.  However, the available fonts
may be different on different printers.  For a
given printer, the font numbers available are as specified on the
usage menu of 
.I psf
(generated with "psf -").

Any unrecognized escape sequences are ignored.

.SH PRINTER SPOOLING

If 
.I psffilter
has been installed as part of the lp/lpsched
.I lp
spooling system,
.I psf
options may be passed in the 
.I lp
command line using the 
.B -o
option for 
.I lp
:

.nf
        lp -o"-4xh" this.file that.file
           --------
.fi

The additional options of "banner" and "nobanner"
may be passed to the spooler to print or not print a banner page:

.nf
        lp -o"nobanner -4xh" this.file that.file
or
        lp -o"banner -4xh" this.file that.file
.fi

The spooler system also recognizes the
.B -z
option to force printing of postscript code.

If the spooler is
.I lp/lpsched,
then the spooler binary is normally
.I psffilter.
If the spooler is 
.I lpr/lpd,
the binary is
.I psflpd.

If the system's spooler is
.I lpr/lpd
then options may not be passed to the print filter: usually
the system administrator has configured a number of different
printer names that use different default printing characteristics
of
.I psf.

For example, printing 2-up on a page could be done with
the command:

	lpr -P2up my.file

.SH ENVIRONMENT
If the environment variable
.B PSFLP 
is set, then
.I psf
and
.I psfdoub
will use the value as the name of the output print file.
If this variable is not set, the default output file
is
.I stdout.

For example.

	set PSFLP=prn

would be a convenient way to always direct the output
of
.I psf
to
the MSDOS printer
.I prn.

If the environment variable
.B PSFDEF
is set,
.I psf
uses the set value as the name of the
.I .def
file to use.

For example: 

	set PSFDEF=/etc/psfprint.def

.SH DIAGNOSTICS

Error messages are written to stderr.  If psf is used as
a spooler filter, the error messages are written to the
spooler error logging file.  If a serial/ethernet printer
is connected, additional printer-generated messages may
also appear in the log file.

Standard messages generated by psf:

.nf
no alternate bins permitted
paper bin greater than maximum for printer
Double sided or book in reverse ordered not supported
Font number invalid
        - use 'psf -' to see a list of fonts available
cannot create work file
	- directory permission?
cannot allocate enough memory
Cannot open output file
	- directory permission?
Unknown file xxxx
Bad psfprint.def file
        - the psfprint.def file is corrupted.  Contact
          your systems administrator.
.fi

.SH BUGS
Double sided reverse ordered printing with the
.B -dv
options is not supported.

Line wrap with the
.B -e
option works correctly for Courier font only.  If other
fonts are used, inappropriate line wraps may result.
Psf does not know about font metrics.

Double sided printing may not work correctly with
top margin or left margin indentation.

Psf has far to many options.

.SH FILES
.nf
\/usr/spool/lp/model/psfprint.def:  printer definition file
\/usr/local/lib/psf/psfprint.def:   printer definition file
psfbook.psd:  temp output file for double sided printing.
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO

psfmail psfbs psfman psfnroff psfmbox psfdoub lp lpadmin lpr lpd

.SH AUTHOR

Tony Field.         tony@ajfcal.cuc.ab.ca
