.\" $Id: psfbanner.1,v 3.1 1991/11/27 06:10:44 ajf Exp ajf $
.TH psfbanner 1 ""
.SH NAME
psfbanner \- print a postscript banner page
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
psfbanner  Userid Name Requestid Printer 
          Options Date Machineid Title
.fi
          [
.B -b
.I n
] [
.B -g
.I size
] [
.B -u
.I f.def
]
.nf

where:   Userid    = the originating user's id
         Name      = user gecos name
         Requestid = printer request string
         Printer   = printer name
         Options   = use options with -o
         Date      = current date and time
         Machineid = host name
         Title     = user provided job title
         -b n      = select paper bin n
         -g size   = select paper size (letter, b5, etc)
         -u f.def  = use this printer definition file

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I Psfbanner
prints a job banner using parameters passed to it
from the
.I lp/lpsched
spooler.

The paramters Userid,..., Title are required to
exist in the order indicated.  Options follow
the parameters.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -b n
selects paper bin
.I n.
If not specified, the default paper bin is used.

.TP
.B -g size
selects the paper size such as A4, Letter, etc.
If not specified, then the default paper size is used.

.TP
.B -g f.def
selects an alternate version of
.I psfprint.def
to describe the printer characteristics.

.SH NOTES
.I Psfbanner
is used to print banners as part of a printer spooling
system and is not normally used interactively.  It is
activated in printer models.

.SH FILES
/usr/spool/lp/model/psf
