.\" $Id: psfdoub.1,v 3.1 1991/11/27 06:10:44 ajf Exp ajf $
.TH PSFDOUB 1 ""
.SH NAME
psfdoub \- print double sided (psf)
.SH SYNOPSIS

.B psfdoub n
[
.B -u
.I f.def
] [
.B -v
]
.I file
.nf

where   n  is the number 1, 2, or 3
           1 = print first side
           2 = print second side
           3 = print both sides (must have second print tray)
          -r = reverse order print
    -u f.def = name of .def file to use
        file = input file (default: psfbook.psd)
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

If the postscript filter 
.I psf
is used with the -d (double sided)
option, the output file
.I psfbook.psd
must be passed to 
.I psfdoub
to print
the generated file in "double sided" format.  (See NOTE below.)

The printing is done in two passes:  first to print side one,
second to print side two.

The general sequence of commands is be:

.nf
        psf -d my.file 
        psfdoub -1 psfbook.psd | lp
                   <-- re-feed the paper for 2nd pass
        psfdoub -2 psfbook.psd | lp
.fi

.I Psf
generates the intermediate file
.I psfbook.psd.
The first invocation of 
.I psfdoub
with the -1 option prints only the front side
of the pages.  After the printing is complete,  the paper must be
re-fed into the print hopper.  The psfdoub -2 command is then issued to print
on the back side of the pages.

If 
.I psfdoub
is used with the -3 option, the front sides are printed.  Automatically,
the printer is switched to accept input from the alternate print tray.
As soon as the alternate print tray is loaded, the second side is printed.
E.g.:
.nf
        psf -d my.file 
        psfdoub -3 psfbook.psd | lp
.fi

The -3 option may be used only if the printer has two print trays.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -123
sets the desired page size for printing.  See above.

.TP
.B -r
causes the pages to be printed in reverse order.

.TP
.B -u f.def
causes the specified printer definition file to be used rather
that 
.I psfprint.def.

.TP
.B file
is the name of the file to be processed.  The file name
generated by
.I psf
is
.I psfbook.psd.
If an input file name is not provided, the
.I psfbook.psd
is assumed.

.SH NOTE

If 
.I psf
was compiled with the "-DHOPPER" option and the postscript printer
has at least two paper hoppers, 
.I psf
automatically calls
.I psfdoub
to perform
double sided printing. Manual invocation of 
.I psfdoub
is not necessary.

If 
.I psf
was not compiled with "-DHOPPER" or if the postscript printer does
not have at least two paper hoppers, then
.I psfdoub
must be used as described
above.

The use of option "-3" assumes that 
.I psf
was compiled 
.B without
the "-DHOPPER"
option, however the printer does, in fact, have at least two paper
hoppers.

Examine shell script
.I psfdouble
as an example on setting up suitable shell scripts
for double sided printing.

.I Psfdoub is also used by
.I psf
for reverse order printing.

.SH BUGS
Double sided reverse ordered printing is not supported.

.SH FILES
.nf
psfprint.def - printer definition file
psfbook.psd  - file to be processed by psfdoub
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO

psf psfmbox psfmail psfbs psfman psfnroff
