.\" $Id: psfmail.1,v 3.1 1991/11/27 06:10:44 ajf Exp ajf $
.TH PSFMAIL 1 ""
.SH NAME
psfmail \- postscript mail pre-filter (psf)
.SH SYNOPSIS

.B psfmail
[
.B -s
]
.I file file ... > out.file
.nf

where     -s = show all header lines
        file = input files (or stdin)
.fi

.SH EXAMPLE

      psfmail mail.file | psf -2 | lp

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I Psfmail
is a very simple filter for mail documents. It italicizes 
the Subject: and attempts to place peoples names in boldface. It can be
used to print entire mail boxes while suppressing unnecessary mail
headers.

Normally, 
.I psfmail
is not used directly:
.I psfmbox
is used.  This is a wrapper for
.I psfmail
and is much more convenient to use.

Mail box message file may be printed with:

.nf
      psfmail mail.file | psf -2 | lp
.fi

If 
.I psf
has been installed as part of the print spooling system,
then the output from psfmail may be passed directly to the 
.I lp
spooler with:

.nf
     psfmail mail.file | lp
.fi

If multiple mailboxes are printed, it might be preferable to use the
command (refer to the man pages for psfmbox):
.nf

      psfmbox file file ...
.fi

This date-stamps and identifies the mail box name.  Each mailbox file
is treated as a separate print job.  This may result in printer banner
pages for each file.

If 
.I psfmail
and
.I psf
are used with 
.I ELM
the user's elmrc file should be modified
to specify the following "print" line (or reasonable approximation):

.nf
      print = /usr/bin/psfmail %s | /usr/bin/psf -2 | /usr/bin/lp
.fi

.SH OPTIONS

.TP .9i
.B \-s
causes all mail headers to be printed.  If this option is not
specified, then psfmail will suppress "meaningless" headers such as:

.nf
            Received:
            References:
            Path:
            Message-ID:
.fi

and other.  If additional headers are to be ignored, the source for
psfmail.c must be modified.

.SH SEE ALSO
psf psfbs  psfmbox psfnroff psfman
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
Tony Field.         tony@ajfcal.cuc.ab.ca
