.TH pine 1 "Version 3.85"
.SH NAME
pine \- read and send electronic mail with an easy user interface 
.SH SYNTAX 
.B pine
[\-r] [\-k] [\-z] [\-h] [\-l] [\-conf] [\-f
.I folder
] [\-d
.I debug-level
] [\-n
.I message-num
] [\-sort
.I order
] [\-i
.I keystrokes
] [\-p
.I config-file
] [\-P
.I config-file
] [
.I address
,
.I address
] 

.B pinef
[\-r] [\-z] [\-h] [\-l] [\-conf] [\-f
.I folder
] [\-d
.I debug-level
] [\-n
.I message-num
] [\-sort
.I order
] [\-i
.I keystrokes
] [\-p
.I config-file
] [\-P
.I config-file
] [
.I address
,
.I address
] 

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pine 
is a mail user agent designed primarily for novice users, though
it's full-featured enough for processing large amounts of mail.
.I Pine
is completely interactive and runs on 80x24 or larger terminals, making use
of the full screen. Some of the design principles were to keep things
simple and straight-forward with a limited number of well selected
features; to provide the user with a menu to pick commands from; to be
forgiving of mistakes so the user can learn while doing without fear
of disaster, and to provide immediate feedback to the user for each
command.
.I Pine
has its own tightly integrated pager for scrolling though incoming
messages and its own editor
.I (Pico)
for composing messages.
.PP
.I Pine
uses the 
.I c-client
library to access mail files. The 
.I c-client
acts as a switch between different mail file formats/drivers.
Currently it understands Berkeley mail files, Tenex mail files, the
.B IMAP2bis
protocol, and NetNews. 
.B IMAP2bis
is the Interactive Mail Access
Protocol described in RFC 1176 and modified by the IMAP2bis draft paper.
With an 
.B IMAP
server such as 
.I imapd
running on a central host users can access their e-mail from
many different hosts on the network without having to login to the
central host.
.PP
Outgoing mail is usually handed off to
.IR sendmail ,
but it can also be posted directly via 
.B SMTP
when configured to do so in the
.I .pinerc
file or the global
.I pine.conf
file. (SMTP is the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol defined in RFC-822).
.PP
.I Pine
also supports
.B MIME,
The Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions defined in RFC-1341. This
allows
.I Pine 
to send and receive multipart and multimedia e-mail. 
.I Pine
meets the minimal 
.B MIME
compliance requirements and is able to view most parts of any received
.B MIME
message and to save all parts to files, whatever their format. On the
composing side, the focus of the
.B MIME 
implementation has been to allow users to attach files to messages so they can
transfer arbitrary messages, rather than on creating true multi-media
e-mail with graphics and sounds. This allows UNIX
.I Pine
and
.I PC-Pine 
users to mail spread sheets and other such
files back and forth. 
.I Pine
will recognize a few of the multimedia formats such as
.B GIF
files. When
they are attached they are tagged as being images and if
.I Pine
is running on an X-terminal it will call
.I xloadimage
to display them.
.PP
The command line options are:
.IP \fB-d\ \fIdebug-level\fR 20
Debugging will be output to the 
.I .pine-debugX
file at level 
.I debug-level
(0-9).  A 
.I debug-level
of 0 turns debugging off for the session.
.IP \fB-f\ \fIfolder\fR 20
Open named folder (in place of INBOX) on startup
.IP \fB-i\ \fIkeystrokes\fR 20
Initial (comma separated list of) keystrokes which Pine should execute
on startup.  If no
\fIkeystrokes\fR are specified, Pine starts up in the FOLDER INDEX screen.
.IP \fB-k\fR 20
Use function keys for commands. This is the same as running the command
.IR pinef .
.IP \fB-l\fR 20
When displaying folder list, expand all collections.
.IP \fB-n\ \fImessage-num\fR 20
Pine will start up with the specified message number being the current
message.
.IP \fB-p\ \fIconfig-file\fR 20
Used the named file as the configuration file instead of 
.IR .pinerc .
.IP \fB-P\ \fIconfig-file\fR 20
Used the named file as the configuration file instead of the regular 
system-wide configuration file 
.IR pine.conf .
.IP \fB-r\fR 20
Go into restricted demo mode.
.I Pine
will only send mail to itself
and functions like save and export are restricted.
.IP \fB-sort\ \fIorder\fR
Sort the display of the index of the folder in one of the following orders: 
.I arrival, subject, from, date, size,
or
.I reverse. Arrival 
order is the default. Any sort may be reversed by adding 
.I /reverse
to it.
.I Reverse
by itself is the same as
.IR arrival/reverse .
.IP \fB-z\fR 20
Enable ^Z or SIGTSTP so pine may be suspended.
.IP \fIaddress\fR 20
Send mail to 
.I address.
This will cause 
.I Pine
to go directly into the message composer.
.IP \fB-h\fR 20
Print out help on the possible flags and arguments that can be give in
.IR Pine .
.IP \fB-conf\fR 20
Produce a sample/fresh copy of the \fBsystem\fR
.I Pine
configuration file on
the standard output. This is distinct from the per user
.I .pinerc
file.

.PP
This documentation is not intended to be complete. The help screens
in
.I Pine
constitute the main documentation. There are also some
technical notes with the source. A general overview of features includes:
.IP
View, save, export, delete, print, reply and forward incoming mail.
.IP
Compose message in a simple editor with word wrap and spelling
checker. A message under composition may be temporarily postponed while
other work in
.I Pine
is being done.
.IP
Full screen selection and management of mail folders.
.IP
Address book to keep a list of long or frequently used addresses.
Distribution lists are available and may refer to other lists or entries
as many levels deep as desired.  Address book entries can be taken from
incoming mail without retyping them. 
.IP
New mail checking and notification occurs automatically every thirty seconds.
.IP
On-line, context-sensitive help screens.
.SH FILES
.if n .ta 2.7i
.if t .ta 2.0i
/usr/spool/mail/xxxx	Folder for incoming mail
.br
~/.addressbook	Ascii address book file
.br
~/mail	Directory of mail folders
.br
~/.pine-debugx	Diagnostic log for debugging
.br
~/.pinerc	The user pine configuration file
.br
/usr/local/lib/pine.info	Local pointer to system administrator
.br
/usr/local/lib/pine.conf	System wide pine configuration file
.br
/tmp/.\\usr\\spool\\mail\\xxxx	Read/write per folder/mailbox lock files
.SH "SEE ALSO"
pico(1), binmail(1), aliases(5), mailaddr(7), sendmail(8), spell(1), imapd(8)
.SH AUTHORS
Mike Seibel, Steve Hubert, David Miller, and Mark Crispin, with contributions 
on the design from many others
