.\" @(#)slipdlogsum.1	1.1 (13 Oct 1993)
.\".........................................................................
.\" Copyright 1993, Jim Avera.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" 
.\" You may use, modify, or distribute this work (or the portions owned by the 
.\" above copyright holder) ONLY as described in the file "COPYRIGHT" which 
.\" accompanies this file or program.
.\" 
.\" BECAUSE THIS SOFTWARE IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY,
.\" EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED 
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TO
.\" THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW.  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS".
.\" IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY LAW WILL COPYRIGHT HOLDER BE LIABLE FOR 
.\" DAMAGES OF ANY NATURE ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
.\" PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"..........................................................................
.\"
.TH slipdlogsum 1M TCP/IP
.SH NAME
slipdlogsum \- Summarize dial-out SLIP usage
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBslipdlogsum\fP [\fB-v\fP] [logfile]
.fi
.PP
This program is part of TSLIP %VERSION%
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Slipdlogsum
prints a summary of entries in a log file from \fIslipd\fP.  The result is
an easy-to-read listing of successful connections, without dialout debug 
logging, etc.
.PP
One line is output for each connection (successful dial-out) and disconnection
(idle timeout).  A summary is then printed giving the total connect time
for each slip interface.
.PP
.B -v
(verbose) shows all input lines and their disposition.
.PP
If no input file is specified, input is read from
/var/adm/slip.log .
.PP
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
slipd(1M), %DRIVER_NAME%(7)
.SH AUTHOR
Jim Avera (jima@netcom.com) October, 1993
