.ad l
.nh
.TH ANIMATE 1 "10 October 1992" "ImageMagick"
.SH NAME
animate - display a sequence of images on any workstation running X
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "animate" [ \fIoptions\fP ...] \fIfile\fP
[ [ \fIoptions\fP ...] \fIfile\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIAnimate\fP displays a sequence of images on any workstation display
running an X server.  \fIAnimate\fP first determines the hardware
capabilities of the workstation.  If the number of unique colors in an
image is less than or equal to the number the workstation can support,
the image is displayed in an X window.  Otherwise the number of colors
in the image is first reduced to match the color resolution of the
workstation before it is displayed.
.PP
This means that a continuous-tone 24 bits-per-pixel image can display on a
8 bit pseudo-color device or monochrome device.  In most instances the
reduced color image closely resembles the original.  Alternatively, a
monochrome or pseudo-color image sequence can display on a continuous-tone
24 bits-per-pixel device.
.PP
To help prevent color flashing on X server visuals that have colormaps,
\fIanimate\fP creates a single colormap from the image sequence.  This can
be rather time consuming.  You can speed this operation up by reducing
the colors in the image before you `animate' them.  Use \fImogrify\fP
to color reduce the images to a single colormap.  See \fBmogrify(1)\fP for
details.  Alternatively, you can use a Standard Colormap; or a static, direct,
or true color visual.  You can define a Standard Colormap with
\fIxstdcmap\fP.  See \fBxstdcmap(1)\fP for details.
.SH EXAMPLES
To animate a set of images of a cockatoo, use:
.PP
     animate cockatoo.*
.PP
To animate a cockatoo image sequence while using the Standard Colormap
"best", use:
.PP
     xstdcmap -best
     animate -map best cockatoo.*
.PP
To animate an image of a cockatoo without a border centered on a
backdrop, use:
.PP
     animate +borderwidth -backdrop cockatoo.*
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B "-backdrop"
display the image centered on a backdrop.

This backdrop covers the entire workstation screen and is useful for
hiding other X window activity while viewing the image sequence.   The color
of the backdrop is specified as the background color.  Refer to \fBX
RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-clip \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
preferred size and location of the clipped image.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.

Use clipping to apply image processing options, or display, only a
particular area of an image.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBclipGeometry\fP
(class \fBClipGeometry\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-colormap \fItype\fP"
the type of colormap: \fIShared\fP or \fIPrivate\fP.

This option only applies when the default X server visual is
\fIPseudoColor\fP or \fIGrayScale\fP.  Refer to \fB-visual\fP for more
details.  By default, a shared colormap is allocated.  The image shares
colors with other X clients.  Some image colors could be approximated,
therefore your image may look very different than intended.  Choose
\fIPrivate\fP and the image colors appear exactly as they are
defined.  However, other clients may go "technicolor" when the image
colormap is installed.
.TP 5
.B "-colors \fIvalue\fP"
preferred number of colors in the image.

The actual number of colors in the image may be less than your request,
but never more.  Note, this is a color reduction option.  Images with
less unique colors than specified with this option will remain unchanged.
Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

Note, options \fB-dither\fP, \fB-colorspace\fP, and \fB-treedepth\fP affect
the color reduction algorithm.
.TP 5
.B "-colorspace \fIvalue\fP"
the type of colorspace: \fIGRAY\fP, \fIRGB\fP, \fIXYZ\fP, \fIYIQ\fP, or
\fIYUV\fP.
 
Color reduction, by default, takes place in the RGB color space.
Empirical evidence suggests that distances in color spaces such as YUV
or YIQ correspond to perceptual color differences more closely
than do distances in RGB space.  These color spaces may give better
results when color reducing an image.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for
more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-delay \fImilliseconds\fP"
display the next image after pausing.

This option is useful for regulating the display of the sequence of
images.  \fImilliseconds\fP milliseconds must expire before the display of
the next image.  The default is to display each image without delay.
.TP 5
.B "-density \fI<width>x<height>
vertical and horizonal density of the image.

This option specifies an image density whose interpretation changes
with the type of image.  The default is 72 dots per inch in the
horizonal and vertical direction for Postscript.  Text files default to
80 characters in width and 60 lines in height.  Use this option to
alter the default density.
.TP 5
.B "-display \fIhost:display[.screen]\fP"
specifies the X server to contact; see \fBX(1)\fP.
.TP 5
.B "-dither"
apply Floyd/Steinberg error diffusion to the image.

The basic strategy of dithering is to trade intensity resolution for
spatial resolution by averaging the intensities of several neighboring
pixels.  Images which suffer from severe contouring when reducing colors
can be improved with this option.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-gamma \fIvalue\fP"
level of gamma correction.

The same color image displayed on two different workstations may look
different due to differences in the display monitor.  Use gamma
correction to adjust for this color difference.  Reasonable values
extend from 0.8 to 2.3.
.TP 5
.B "-geometry \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
preferred size and location of the image window.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.  By default, the window size is the image
size and the location is choosen by you when it is mapped.

If the specified image size is smaller than the actual image size, the
image is first reduced to an integral of the specified image size with
an antialias digital filter.  The image is then scaled to the exact
specified image size with pixel replication.  If the specified image
size is greater than the actual image size, the image is first enlarged
to an integral of the specified image size with bilinear
interpolation.  The image is then scaled to the exact specified image
size with pixel replication.

When displaying an image on an X server, \fI<x offset>\fP and
\fI<y offset>\fP is relative to the root window.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBimageGeometry\fP
(class \fBImageGeometry\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-map \fItype\fP"
animate images using this Standard Colormap type.

Choose from these Standard Colormap types:

    default
    best
    red
    green
    blue
    gray

The X server must support the Standard Colormap you choose, otherwise an
error occurs.  See \fBxstdcmap(1)\fP for one way of creating Standard Colormaps.
.TP 5
.B "-monochrome"
transform the image to black and white.

Monochrome images can benefit from error diffusion.  Use \fB-dither\fP with
this option to diffuse the error.
.TP 5
.B "-reflect"
create a "mirror image" by reflecting the image scanlines.
.TP 5
.B "-rotate \fIdegrees\fP"
apply Paeth image rotation to the image.

Empty triangles left over from rotating the image are filled with
the color defined by the pixel at location (0,0).
.TP 5
.B "-scale \fI<width factor>x<height factor>\fP"
preferred size factors of the image.

This option behaves like \fB-geometry\fP except the width and height values
are relative instead of absolute.  The image size is multiplied by the
width and height factors to obtain the final image dimensions.  If only
one factor is specified, both the width and height factors assume the
value.

Factors may be fractional.  To increase the size of an image, use a
scale factor greater than 1.0.  To decrease an image's size, use a
scale factor less than 1.0.  Default is 1.0.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBscaleGeometry\fP
(class \fBScaleGeometry\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-treedepth \fIvalue\fP"
Normally, this integer value is zero or one.  A zero or one tells
\fIAnimate\fP to choose a optimal tree depth for the color reduction
algorithm.

An optimal depth generally allows the best representation of the source
image with the fastest computational speed and the least amount of
memory.  However, the default depth is inappropriate for some images.
To assure the best representation, try values between 2 and 8 for this
parameter.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-visual \fItype\fP"
animate images using this visual type.

Choose from these visual classes:

    StaticGray
    GrayScale
    StaticColor
    PseudoColor
    TrueColor
    DirectColor
    default
    \fIvisual id\fP

The X server must support the visual you choose, otherwise an error occurs.
If a visual is not specified, the visual class that can display the most
simultaneous colors on the default screen is choosen.
.PP
In addition to those listed above, you can specify these standard X
resources as command line options:  \fB-background\fP,
\fB-bordercolor\fP, \fB-borderwidth\fP,  \fB-font\fP,
\fB-foreground\fP, \fB-iconGeometry\fP, \fB-iconic\fP, \fB-name\fP, or
\fB-title\fP.  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.PP
Any option you specify on the command line remains in effect until it is
explicitly changed by specifying the option again with a different effect.
For example, to animate two images, the first with 32 colors and the
second with only 16 colors, use:
.PP
     animate -colors 32 cockatoo.1 -colors 16 cockatoo.2
.PP
Change \fI-\fP to \fI\+\fP in any option above to reverse its effect.
For example, specify \fB\+dither\fP to not apply error diffusion to an image.
.PP
\fIfile\fP specifies the image filename.  By default, the image format
is determined by its magic number. To specify a particular image format, precede
the filename with an image format name and a colon (i.e.
mtv:image) or specify the image type as the filename suffix (i.e. image.mtv).
See \fBCONVERT(1)\fP for a list of valid image formats.  Specify \fIfile\fP
as \fI-\fP for standard input or output.  If \fIfile\fP has the
extension \fB.Z\fP, the file is decoded with \fIuncompress\fP.
.PP
Image filenames may appear in any order on the command line if the image
format is \fIMIFF\fI (refer to \fBMIFF(5)\fI) and the \fIscene\fP keyword is
specified in the image.  Otherwise the images will display in the order
they appear on the command line.
.SH BUTTONS
.TP 5
.B "1"
Press and drag to select a command from a pop-up menu.  Choose from
these commands:

    Play
    Step
    Repeat
    Auto Reverse
    Slower
    Faster
    Forward
    Reverse
    Image Info
    Quit
.SH KEYBOARD ACCELERATORS
.TP 5
.B "p"
Press to animate the sequence of images.
.TP 5
.B "s"
Press to display the next image in the sequence.
.TP 5
.B "."
Press to continually display the sequence of images.
.TP 5
.B "a"
Press to automatically reverse the sequence of images.
.TP 5
.B "<"
Press to slow the display of the images.  Refer to \fB-delay\fP for more
information.
.TP 5
.B ">"
Press to speed-up the display of the images.  Refer to \fB-delay\fP for more
information.
.TP 5
.B "f"
Press to animate in the forward direction.
.TP 5
.B "r"
Press to animate in the reverse direction.
.TP 5
.B "i"
Press to display information about the image.  Press any key or button
to erase the information.

This information is printed: image name;  image size; and the total
number of unique colors in the image.
.TP 5
.B "q"
Press to discard all images and exit program.
.SH "X RESOURCES"
\fIAnimate\fP options can appear on the command line or in your X
resource file.  Options on the command line supersede values specified
in your X resource file.  See \fBX(1)\fP for more information on X
resources.

All \fIanimate\fP options have a corresponding X resource.  In addition,
the \fIanimate\fP program uses the following X resources:
.TP 5
.B background (\fPclass\fB Background)
Specifies the preferred color to use for the image window background.  The
default is black.
.TP 5
.B borderColor (\fPclass\fB BorderColor)
Specifies the preferred color to use for the image window border.  The
default is white.
.TP 5
.B borderWidth (\fPclass\fB BorderWidth)
Specifies the width in pixels of the image window border.  The default is 2.
.TP 5
.B font (\fPclass\fB Font)
Specifies the name of the preferred font to use when displaying text
within the image window.  The default is \fI/g9x15\fP, \fIfixed\fP, or
\fI/g6x13\fP determined by the image window size.
.TP 5
.B foreground (\fPclass\fB Foreground)
Specifies the preferred color to use for text within the image window.  The
default is white.
.TP 5
.B iconGeometry (\fPclass\fB IconGeometry)
Specifies the preferred size and position of the application when
iconified.  It is not necessarily obeyed by all window managers.
.TP 5
.B iconic (\fPclass\fB Iconic)
This resource indicates that you would prefer that the application's
windows initially not be visible as if the windows had be immediately
iconified by you.  Window managers may choose not to honor the
application's request.
.TP 5
.B name (\fPclass\fB Name)
This resource specifies the name under which resources for the
application should be found.  This resource is useful in shell aliases to
distinguish between invocations of an application, without resorting to
creating links to alter the executable file name.  The default is the
application name.
.TP 5
.B title (\fPclass\fB Title)
This resource specifies the title to be used for the image window.  This
information is sometimes used by a window manager to provide some sort
of header identifying the window.  The default is the image file name.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 5
.B DISPLAY
To get the default host, display number, and screen.
.SH SEE ALSO
display(1), import(1), XtoPS(1), mogrify(1), convert(1), Quantize(9), MIFF(5),
X(1), xstdcmap(1), compress(1),
MIFF(5)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1992 E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
.PP
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and
its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of E. I. du Pont de Nemours
& Company not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
distribution of the software without specific, written prior
permission.  E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company makes no representations
about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided
"as is" without express or implied warranty.
.PP
E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company disclaims all warranties with regard
to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness, in no event shall E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company be
liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any
damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether
in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising
out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The MIT X Consortium for making network transparent graphics a reality.
.PP
Michael Halle, Spatial Imaging Group at MIT, for the initial
implementation of Alan Paeth's image rotation algorithm.
.PP
David Pensak, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, for providing a
computing environment that made this program possible.
.PP
Paul Raveling, USC Information Sciences Institute, for the original
idea of using space subdivision for the color reduction algorithm.
.SH AUTHORS
John Cristy, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company Incorporated
