.ad l
.nh
.TH DISPLAY 1 "10 October 1992" "ImageMagick"
.SH NAME
display - display an image on any workstation running X
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "display" [ \fIoptions\fP ...] \fIfile\fP
[ [ \fIoptions\fP ...] \fIfile\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIDisplay\fP is a machine architecture independent image processing
and display program.  It can display an image on any workstation
display running an X server.  \fIDisplay\fP first determines the
hardware capabilities of the workstation.  If the number of unique
colors in the image is less than or equal to the number the workstation
can support, the image is displayed in an X window.  Otherwise the
number of colors in the image is first reduced to match the color
resolution of the workstation before it is displayed.
.PP
This means that a continuous-tone 24 bits-per-pixel image can display on a
8 bit pseudo-color device or monochrome device.  In most instances the
reduced color image closely resembles the original.  Alternatively, a
monochrome or pseudo-color image can display on a continuous-tone 24
bits-per-pixel device.
.SH EXAMPLES
To scale an image of a cockatoo to exactly 640 pixels in width and 480
pixels in height and position the window at location (200,200), use:
.PP
     display -geometry 640x480\+200\+200 cockatoo.miff
.PP
To display an image of a cockatoo without a border centered on a
backdrop, use:
.PP
     display +borderwidth -backdrop cockatoo.miff
.PP
To tile an image of a cockatoo onto the root window, use:
.PP
     display -window root cockatoo.miff
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B "-backdrop"
display the image centered on a backdrop.

This backdrop covers the entire workstation screen and is useful for
hiding other X window activity while viewing the image.   The color of
the backdrop is specified as the background color.  Refer to \fBX
RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-clip \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
preferred size and location of the clipped image.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.

Use clipping to apply image processing options to, or display, a
particular area of an image.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBclipGeometry\fP
(class \fBClipGeometry\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-colormap \fItype\fP"
the type of colormap: \fIShared\fP or \fIPrivate\fP.

This option only applies when the default X server visual is
\fIPseudoColor\fP or \fIGrayScale\fP.  Refer to \fB-visual\fP for more
details.  By default, a shared colormap is allocated.  The image shares
colors with other X clients.  Some image colors could be approximated,
therefore your image may look very different than intended.  Choose
\fIPrivate\fP and the image colors appear exactly as they are
defined.  However, other clients may go "technicolor" when the image
colormap is installed.
.TP 5
.B "-colors \fIvalue\fP"
preferred number of colors in the image.

The actual number of colors in the image may be less than your request,
but never more.  Note, this is a color reduction option.  Images with
less unique colors than specified with this option will remain unchanged.
Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

Note, options \fB-dither\fP, \fB-colorspace\fP, and \fB-treedepth\fP affect
the color reduction algorithm.
.TP 5
.B "-colorspace \fIvalue\fP"
the type of colorspace: \fIGRAY\fP, \fIRGB\fP, \fIXYZ\fP, \fIYIQ\fP, or
\fIYUV\fP.

Color reduction, by default, takes place in the RGB color space.
Empirical evidence suggests that distances in color spaces such as YUV
or YIQ correspond to perceptual color differences more closely
than do distances in RGB space.  These color spaces may give better
results when color reducing an image.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for
more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required for this option
to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-compress \fItype\fP"
the type of image compression: \fIQEncoded\fP or \fIRunlengthEncoded\fP.

Use this option with \fB-write\fP to specify the the type of image
compression.  See \fBMIFF(5)\fP for details.

Specify \fB\+compress\fP to store the binary image in an uncompressed format.
The default is the compression type of the specified image file.
.TP 5
.B "-delay \fIseconds\fP"
display the next image after pausing.

This option is useful when viewing several images in sequence.  Each
image will display and wait the number of seconds specified before the
next image is displayed.  The default is to display the image
and wait until you choose to display the next image or terminate the
program.
.TP 5
.B "-density \fI<width>x<height>
vertical and horizonal density of the image.

This option specifies an image density whose interpretation changes
with the type of image.  The default is 72 dots per inch in the
horizonal and vertical direction for Postscript.  Text files default to
80 characters in width and 60 lines in height.  Use this option to
alter the default density.
.TP 5
.B "-display \fIhost:display[.screen]\fP"
specifies the X server to contact; see \fBX(1)\fP.
.TP 5
.B "-dither"
apply Floyd/Steinberg error diffusion to the image.

The basic strategy of dithering is to trade intensity resolution for
spatial resolution by averaging the intensities of several neighboring
pixels.  Images which suffer from severe contouring when reducing colors
can be improved with this option.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required
for this option to take effect.
.TP 5
.B "-enhance"
apply a digital filter to enhance a noisy image.
.TP 5
.B "-gamma \fIvalue\fP"
level of gamma correction.

The same color image displayed on two different workstations may look
different due to differences in the display monitor.  Use gamma
correction to adjust for this color difference.  Reasonable values
extend from 0.8 to 2.3.
.TP 5
.B "-geometry \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
preferred size and location of the image window.  See \fBX(1)\fP for details
about the geometry specification.  By default, the window size is the image
size and the location is choosen by you when it is mapped.

If the specified image size is smaller than the actual image size, the
image is first reduced to an integral of the specified image size with
an antialias digital filter.  The image is then scaled to the exact
specified image size with pixel replication.  If the specified image
size is greater than the actual image size, the image is first enlarged
to an integral of the specified image size with bilinear
interpolation.  The image is then scaled to the exact specified image
size with pixel replication.

When displaying an image on an X server, \fI<x offset>\fP and
\fI<y offset>\fP is relative to the root window.  When printing an image,
\fI<x offset>\fP and \fI<y offset>\fP is relative to a Postscript
page.  See \fB-print\fP for more details.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBimageGeometry\fP
(class \fBImageGeometry\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-inverse"
apply color inversion to image.

The red, green, and blue intensities of an image are negated.
.TP 5
.B "-map \fItype\fP"
display image using this Standard Colormap type.

Choose from these Standard Colormap types:

    default
    best
    red
    green
    blue
    gray

The X server must support the Standard Colormap you choose, otherwise an
error occurs.  See \fBxstdcmap(1)\fP for one way of creating Standard
Colormaps.
.TP 5
.B "-monochrome"
transform the image to black and white.

Monochrome images can benefit from error diffusion.  Use \fB-dither\fP with
this option to diffuse the error.
.TP 5
.B "-noise"
reduce the noise in an image with a noise peak elimination filter.

The principal function of noise peak elimination filter is to smooth
the objects within an image without losing edge information and without
creating undesired structures.  The central idea of the algorithm is to
replace a pixel with its next neighbor in value within a 3 x 3 window,
if this pixel has been found to be noise.  A pixel is defined as noise
if and only if this pixel is a maximum or minimum within the 3 x 3 window.
.TP 5
.B "-normalize"
tranform image to span the full range of color values.  This is a contrast
enhancement technique.
.TP 5
.B "-print \fIfilename\fP"
write image as encapsulated Postscript to a file.

If \fIfile\fP already exists, you will be prompted as to whether
it should be overwritten.

By default, the image is scaled and centered to fit on an 612x792 point
Postscript page.  To specify a specific image size or a particular location on
the Postscript page, use \fB-geometry\fP.

By default the image is output in portrait mode.  Use \fB-rotate 90\fP to
display the image in landscape mode.

You can view \fIfile\fP with any Postscript compatible viewer or
printer.  The image is displayed as color on viewers and printers that
support color Postscript, otherwise it is displayed as grayscale.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBprintFilename\fP
(class \fBPrintFilename\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-reflect"
create a "mirror image" by reflecting the image scanlines.
.TP 5
.B "-rotate \fIdegrees\fP"
apply Paeth image rotation to the image.

Empty triangles left over from rotating the image are filled with
the color defined by the pixel at location (0,0).
.TP 5
.B "-scale \fI<width factor>x<height factor>\fP"
preferred size factors of the image.

This option behaves like \fB-geometry\fP except the width and height values
are relative instead of absolute.  The image size is multiplied by the
width and height factors to obtain the final image dimensions.  If only
one factor is specified, both the width and height factors assume the
value.

Factors may be fractional.  To increase the size of an image, use a
scale factor greater than 1.0.  To decrease an image's size, use a
scale factor less than 1.0.  Default is 1.0.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBscaleGeometry\fP
(class \fBScaleGeometry\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.TP 5
.B "-scene \fIvalue\fP"
image scene number.
.TP 5
.B "-treedepth \fIvalue\fP"
Normally, this integer value is zero or one.  A zero or one tells
\fIdisplay\fP to choose a optimal tree depth for the color reduction
algorithm.

An optimal depth generally allows the best representation of the source
image with the fastest computational speed and the least amount of
memory.  However, the default depth is inappropriate for some images.
To assure the best representation, try values between 2 and 8 for this
parameter.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP for more details.

The \fB-colors\fP or \fB-monochrome\fP option is required
for this option to take effect.
.TP 5
.B -verbose
print detailed information about the image.

This information is printed: image scene number;  image name;  image
size; the image class (\fIDirectClass\fP or \fIPseudoClass\fP);  the total
number of unique colors;  and the number of seconds to read and
transform the image.  Refer to \fBMIFF(5)\fP for a description of
the image class.

If \fB-colors\fP is also specified, the total unique colors in the image
and color reduction error values are printed.  Refer to \fBQuantize(9)\fP
for a description of these values.
.TP 5
.B "-visual \fItype\fP"
display image using this visual type.

Choose from these visual classes:

    StaticGray
    GrayScale
    StaticColor
    PseudoColor
    TrueColor
    DirectColor
    default
    \fIvisual id\fP

The X server must support the visual you choose, otherwise an error occurs.
If a visual is not specified, the visual class that can display the most
simultaneous colors on the default X server screen is choosen.
.TP 5
.B "-window \fIid\fP"
set the background pixmap of this window to the image.

\fIid\fP can be a window id or name.  Specify \fBroot\fP to select X's root
window as the target window.

By default the image is tiled onto the background of the target
window.   If \fB-backdrop\fP or \fB-geometry\fP are specified, the
image is surrounded by the background color.  Refer to \fBX
RESOURCES\fP for details.

The image will not display on the root window if the image has more
unique colors than the target window colormap allows.  Use
\fB-colors\fP to reduce the number of colors.
.TP 5
.B "-write \fIfilename\fP"
write image to a file.

If \fIfile\fP already exists, you will be prompted as to whether
it should be overwritten.

By default, the image is stored in the MIFF image format.  If the number of
unique colors in the image exceed 65535, it is stored as \fIDirectClass\fP;
otherwise, it is stored as \fIPseudoClass\fP format.  Refer to \fBMIFF(5)\fP
for more details.

By default, the image is written in the format that it was read in as.
To specify a particular image format, prefix \fIfile\fP with the image
type and a colon (i.e. mtv:image) or specify the image type as the
filename suffix (i.e. image.mtv).  See \fBconvert(1)\fP for a list of
valid image formats.  If \fIfile\fP has the extension \fB.Z\fP, the
file size is reduced using Lempel-Ziv coding with \fBcompress\fP.  If
\fIfile\fP already exists, you will be prompted as to whether it should
be overwritten.

Use \fB-compress\fP to specify the type of image compression.

The equivalent X resource for this option is \fBwriteFilename\fP
(class \fBWriteFilename\fP).  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.PP
In addition to those listed above, you can specify these standard X
resources as command line options:  \fB-background\fP,
\fB-bordercolor\fP, \fB-borderwidth\fP,  \fB-font\fP,
\fB-foreground\fP, \fB-iconGeometry\fP, \fB-iconic\fP, \fB-name\fP, or
\fB-title\fP.  See \fBX RESOURCES\fP for details.
.PP
Any option you specify on the command line remains in effect until it is
explicitly changed by specifying the option again with a different effect.
For example to display two images, the first with 32 colors, and the
second with only 16 colors, use:
.PP
     display -colors 32 cockatoo.miff -colors 16 macaw.miff
.PP
Change \fI-\fP to \fI\+\fP in any option above to reverse its effect.
For example, specify \fB\+compress\fP to store the binary image in an
uncompressed format.
.PP
\fIfile\fP specifies the image filename.  By default, the image format
is determined by its magic number. To specify a particular image format, precede
the filename with an image format name and a colon (i.e.
mtv:image) or specify the image type as the filename suffix (i.e. image.mtv).
See \fBconvert(1)\fP for a list of valid image formats.  Specify \fIfile\fP
as \fI-\fP for standard input or output.  If \fIfile\fP has the
extension \fB.Z\fP, the file is decoded with \fIuncompress\fP.
.SH BUTTONS
The effects of each button press is described below.  Three buttons are
required.  If you have a two button mouse, button 1 and 3 are returned.
Press ALT and button 3 to simulate button 2.
.TP 5
.B "1"
Press and drag to select a command from a pop-up menu.  Choose from
these commands:

    Image Info
    Reflect
    Rotate Right
    Rotate Left
    Half Size
    Double Size
    Restore
    Annotate
    Composite
    Write
    Print
    Next
    Last
    Quit
.TP 5
.B "2"
Press and drag to define a region of the image to clip.  Release the button
to crop the image, or return the pointer to the location of the initial button
press to cancel the cropping operation.
.TP 5
.B "3"
Press and drag to define a region of the image to magnify.

Note, this button behaves differently for a composite MIFF image
created with \fImontage\fP.  Choose a particular tile of the composite
and press this button, the image represented by the tile is then
displayed.  To return to the composite MIFF image, choose \fINext\fP
from the command menu (refer to Button 1).  See \fBmontage(1)\fP and
\fBMIFF(5)\fP for more details.

.SH KEYBOARD ACCELERATORS
.TP 5
.B "i"
Press to display information about the image.  Press any key or button to
erase the information.

This information is printed: image scene number; image name; image
size; the visual class (see \fB-visual\fP); and the total number of
unique colors in the image.
.TP 5
.B "r"
Press to reflect the image scanlines.
.TP 5
.B "/"
Press to rotate the image 90 degrees clockwise.
.TP 5
.B "\e"
Press to rotate the image 90 degrees counter-clockwise.
.TP 5
.B "<"
Press to half the image size.
.TP 5
.B ">"
Press to double the image size.
.TP 5
.B "o"
Press to restore the image to its original size.
.TP 5
.B "a"
Press to annotate the image with text.

Refer to \fBIMAGE ANNOTATION\fP for more details.
.TP 5
.B "c"
Press to composite the image with another.

Refer to \fBIMAGE COMPOSITING\fP for more details.
.TP 5
.B "w"
Press to write the image to a file.
.TP 5
.B "p"
Press to print the image to a file.
.TP 5
.B "n"
Press to display the next image.
.TP 5
.B "l"
Press to display the last image.
.TP 5
.B "q"
Press to discard all images and exit program.
.TP 5
.B "1-9"
Press to change the level of magnification.
.SH "X RESOURCES"
\fIDisplay\fP options can appear on the command line or in your X
resource file.  Options on the command line supersede values specified
in your X resource file.  See \fBX(1)\fP for more information on X
resources.

All \fIdisplay\fP options have a corresponding X resource.  In addition,
\fIdisplay\fP uses the following X resources:
.TP 5
.B background (\fPclass\fB Background)
Specifies the preferred color to use for the image window background.  The
default is black.
.TP 5
.B borderColor (\fPclass\fB BorderColor)
Specifies the preferred color to use for the image window border.  The
default is white.
.TP 5
.B borderWidth (\fPclass\fB BorderWidth)
Specifies the width in pixels of the image window border.  The default is 2.
.TP 5
.B font (\fPclass\fB Font)
Specifies the name of the preferred font to use when displaying text
within the image window.  The default is \fI/g9x15\fP, \fIfixed\fP, or
\fI/g6x13\fP determined by the image window size.
.TP 5
.B font[1-9] (\fPclass\fB Font[1-9])
Specifies the name of the preferred font to use when annotating the
image window with text.  The default fonts are \fIfixed\fP,
\fIvariable\fP, \fI5x8\fP, \fI6x10\fP, \fI7x13bold\fP, \fI8x13bold\fP,
\fI9x15bold\fP, \fI10x20\fP, and \fI12x24\fP.  Refer to \fBIMAGE
ANNOTATION\fP for more details.
.TP 5
.B foreground (\fPclass\fB Foreground)
Specifies the preferred color to use for text within the image window.  The
default is white.
.TP 5
.B iconGeometry (\fPclass\fB IconGeometry)
Specifies the preferred size and position of the application when
iconified.  It is not necessarily obeyed by all window managers.
.TP 5
.B iconic (\fPclass\fB Iconic)
This resource indicates that you would prefer that the application's
windows initially not be visible as if the windows had be immediately
iconified by you.  Window managers may choose not to honor the
application's request.
.TP 5
.B magnify (\fPclass\fB Magnify)
specifies an integral factor by which the image should be enlarged.  The
default is 2.

This value only affects the magnification window which is invoked with
button number 1 after the image is displayed.  Refer to \fBBUTTONS\fP
for more details.
.TP 5
.B name (\fPclass\fB Name)
This resource specifies the name under which resources for the
application should be found.  This resource is useful in shell aliases to
distinguish between invocations of an application, without resorting to
creating links to alter the executable file name.  The default is the
application name.
.TP 5
.B pen[1-9] (\fPclass\fB Pen[1-9])
Specifies the color of the preferred font to use when annotating the
image window with text.  The default colors are \fIblack\fP,
\fIblue\fP, \fIgreen\fP, \fIcyan\fP, \fIgray\fP, \fIred\fP,
\fImagenta\fP, \fIyellow\fP, and \fIwhite\fP.  Refer to \fBIMAGE
ANNOTATION\fP for more details.
.TP 5
.B title (\fPclass\fB Title)
This resource specifies the title to be used for the image window.  This
information is sometimes used by a window manager to provide a
header identifying the window.  The default is the image file name.
.SH IMAGE PANNING
When an image exceeds the width or height of the X server screen,
\fIdisplay\fP maps a small panning window.  The rectangle within the
panning window shows the area that is currently displayed in the
the image window.  To "pan" about the image, press and drag the mouse
within the panning window.  The panning rectangle moves with the mouse
and the image window is updated to reflect the location of the
rectangle within the panning window.  When you have selected the area
of the image you wish to view, just release the mouse button.

The panning window goes away if the image becomes smaller than the
dimensions of the X server screen.
.SH IMAGE ANNOTATION
An image is annotated with text interactively.  There is no command
line argument to annotate an image.  To begin, press button 1 and
choose \fIAnnotate Image\fP from the command menu (see \fBBUTTONS\fP).
Alternatively, press \fIa\fP in the image window (see \fBKEYBOARD
ACCELERATORS\fP).  To exit immediately, press \fIESC\fP.
.PP
A small window appears showing the location of the cursor in the image
window.  You are now in \fIannotate mode\fP.  To exit immediately,
press \fIESC\fP. In \fIannotate mode\fP a button press has a different
effect than described in \fBBUTTONS\fP.  Press a button to affect this
behavior:
.TP 5
.B "1"
Press to select a location within the image window to begin entering text.
.TP 5
.B "2"
Press and drag to select a font from a pop-up menu.  Choose from
these fonts:

    fixed
    variable
    5x8
    6x10
    7x13bold
    8x13bold
    9x15bold
    10x20
    12x24

Other fonts can be specified by setting the X resources \fBfont1\fP through
\fBfont9\fP.  Refer to \fBX RESOURCES\fP for more details.
.TP 5
.B "3"
Press and drag to select a font color from a pop-up menu.  Choose from
these font colors:

    black
    blue
    cyan
    green
    gray
    red
    magenta
    yellow
    white

Other font colors can be specified by setting the X resources \fBpen1\fP
through \fBpen9\fP.  Refer to \fBX RESOURCES\fP for more details.
.PP
Choosing a font and its color is optional.  The default font is
\fIfixed\fP and the default color is \fIblack\fP.  However, you must
choose a location to begin entering text and press button 1.  An
underscore character will appear at the location of the cursor where
you pressed button 1.  The cursor changes to a pencil to indicate
you are in \fItext mode\fP.  To exit immediately, press \fIESC\fP.
.PP
In \fItext mode\fP, any key presses will display the character at
the location of the underscore and advance the underscore cursor.
Enter your text and once completed press \fIESC\fP to finish your image
annotation.  To correct errors press \fIBACK SPACE\fP.  To delete an
entire line of text, press \fIDELETE\fP.  Any text that exceeds the
boundaries of the image window is automatically continued onto the next
line.
.PP
Before exiting \fItext mode\fP, immediately after pressing the
\fIESC\fP key, the image is permanently updated with the text you
entered.  There is no way to `undo' your changes so be careful to
check your text before you press \fIESC\fP.
.PP
The actual color you request for the font is saved in the image.
However, the color that appears in your image window may be different.
For example, on a monochrome screen the text will appear black or white even
if you choose the color red as the font color.  However, the image saved to
a file with \fB-write\fP will be written with red lettering.  To assure
the correct color text in the final image, any \fIPseudoClass\fP image
is promoted to \fIDirectClass\fP (see \fBMIFF(5)\fP).  To
force a \fIPseudoClass\fP image to remain \fIPseudoClass\fP, use
\fB-colors\fP.
.SH IMAGE COMPOSITING
An image composite is created interactively.  There is no command line
argument to composite an image.  To begin, press button 1 and choose
\fIComposite Image\fP from the command menu (see \fBBUTTONS\fP).
Alternatively, press \fIc\fP in the image window (see \fBKEYBOARD
ACCELERATORS\fP).
.PP
First a popup window is displayed requesting you to enter an image name.  
Press \fIRETURN\fP, enter 'X:', or type a file name.  Press \fIRETURN\fP if
you choose not to create a composite image.  When you specify \fBX:\fP
as your file name, the filename has special meaning.  It specifies an X
window by id, name, or \fBroot\fP.  If no filename is specified, the
window is selected by clicking the mouse in the desired window.  See
\fBXtoPS(1)\fP for details.
.PP
A small window appears showing the location of the cursor in the image
window.  You are now in \fIcomposite mode\fP.  To exit immediately,
press \fIESC\fP.  In \fIcomposite mode\fP a button press has a
different effect than described in \fBBUTTONS\fP.  Press a button to
affect this behavior: 
.TP 5
.B "1"
Press to select a location within \fIimage window\fP to composite your
image.
.TP 5
.B "2"
Press and drag to select a composite operation from a pop-up menu.
Choose from these composite operations:

    over
    in
    out
    atop
    xor
    plus
    minus
    add
    subtract
    difference
    replace
.PP
The operations behaves as follows:
.TP 9
.B over
The result will be the union of the two image shapes, with \fIimage\fP
obscuring \fIimage window\fP in the region of overlap.
.TP 9
.B in
The result is simply \fIimage\fP cut by the shape of \fIimage
window\fP.  None of the image data of \fIimage window\fP will be in the
result.
.TP 9
.B out
The resulting image is \fIimage\fP with the shape of \fIimage window\fP
cut out.
.TP 9
.B atop
The result is the same shape as image \fIimage window\fP, with
\fIimage\fP obscuring \fIimage window\fP where the image shapes
overlap.  Note this differs from \fBover\fP because the portion of
\fIimage\fP outside \fIimage window\fP's shape does not appear in the
result.
.TP 9
.B xor
The result is the image data from both \fIimage\fP and \fIimage window\fP
that is outside the overlap region.  The overlap region will be blank.
.TP 9
.B plus
The result is just the sum of the image data.  Output values are
clipped to 255 (no overflow).  This operation is independent
of the alpha channels.
.TP 9
.B minus
The result of \fIimage\fP \- \fIimage window\fP, with underflow clipped
to zero.  The alpha channel is ignored (set to 255, full coverage).
.TP 9
.B add
The result of \fIimage\fP + \fIimage window\fP, with overflow wrapping
around (\fImod\fP 256).
.TP 9
.B subtract
The result of \fIimage\fP - \fIimage window\fP, with underflow wrapping
around (\fImod\fP 256).  The \fBadd\fP and \fBsubtract\fP operators can
be used to perform reversible transformations.
.TP 9
.B difference
The result of abs(\fIimage\fP \- \fIimage window\fP).  This is useful
for comparing two very similar images.
.TP 9
.B replace
The resulting image is \fIimage window\fP replaced with \fIimage\fP.
Here the alpha information is ignored.
.PP
The image compositor requires an alpha, or matte channel in the image
for some operations.  This extra channel usually defines a mask which
represents a sort of a cookie-cutter for the image.  This is the case
when alpha is 255 (full coverage) for pixels inside the shape, zero
outside, and between zero and 255 on the boundary.  If \fIimage\fP does
not have an alpha channel, it is initialized with 0 for any pixel
matching in color to pixel location (0,0), otherwise 255.
.PP
Note that alpha information for \fIimage window\fP is not retained for
colormapped X server visuals (e.g. \fIStaticColor\fP,
\fIStaticColor\fP, \fIGrayScale\fP, \fIPseudoColor\fP).  Correct
compositing behavior may require a \fITrueColor\fP or \fIDirectColor\fP
visual or a \fIStandard Colormap\fP.
.PP
Choosing a composite operator is optional.  The default operator is
\Ifover\fP.  However, you must choose a location to composite your image
and press button 1.  Press and hold button 1 before releasing and an
outline of the image will appear to help you identify your location.
.PP
Immediately after releasing button 1, \fIimage window\fP is
permanently updated with your composited image.  There is no way to
`undo' your changes.  Be careful when choosing your location.
.PP
The actual colors of the composite image is saved.  However, the color
that appears in \fIimage window\fP may be different.  For example, on a
monochrome screen \fIimage window\fP will appear black or white even
though your composited image may have many colors.  If the image is
saved to a file it is written with the correct colors.  To assure the
correct colors are saved in the final image, any \fIPseudoClass\fP
image is promoted to \fIDirectClass\fP (see \fBMIFF(5)\fP).  To force a
\fIPseudoClass\fP image to remain \fIPseudoClass\fP, use \fB-colors\fP.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 5
.B DISPLAY
To get the default host, display number, and screen.
.SH SEE ALSO
import(1), mogrify(1), convert(1), Quantize(9), MIFF(5), X(1), xstdcmap(1),
more(1), compress(1),
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1992 E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
.PP
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and
its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of E. I. du Pont de Nemours
& Company not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
distribution of the software without specific, written prior
permission.  E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company makes no representations
about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided
"as is" without express or implied warranty.
.PP
E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company disclaims all warranties with regard
to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness, in no event shall E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company be
liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any
damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether
in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising
out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The MIT X Consortium for making network transparent graphics a reality.
.PP
Rod Bogart and John W. Peterson, University of Utah.  Image
compositing is loosely based on \fIrlecomp\fP of the Utah Raster
Toolkit.
.PP
Michael Halle, Spatial Imaging Group at MIT, for the initial
implementation of Alan Paeth's image rotation algorithm.
.PP
David Pensak, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, for providing a
computing environment that made this program possible.
.PP
Paul Raveling, USC Information Sciences Institute, for the original
idea of using space subdivision for the color reduction algorithm.
.SH AUTHORS
John Cristy, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company Incorporated
