.ad l
.nh
.TH XTOPS 1 "10 October 1992" "ImageMagick"
.SH NAME
XtoPS - capture some or all of an X server screen and save as Encapsulated
Postscript
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "XtoPS"
[ \fIoptions\fP ... ] \fIfile\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I XtoPS
reads an image from any visible window on an X server and outputs it as
Encapsulated Postscript.  You can capture a single window, the entire
screen, or any rectangular portion of the screen.  You can view the
captured screen with any Postscript compatible viewer or printer.  The
Postscript is displayed in color on viewers or printers that support
color, otherwise it is displayed as grayscale.
.PP
The target window can be specified by id, name, or may be selected by
clicking the mouse in the desired window.  If you press a button and
then drag, a rectangle will form which expands and contracts as
the mouse moves.  To save the portion of the screen defined by the
rectangle, just release the button.  The keyboard bell is rung once at
the beginning of the screen capture and twice it completes.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
To select an X window with the mouse and save it as Encapsulated
Postscript in a file on disk titled window.ps, use:
.PP
     XtoPS window.ps
.PP
To select an X window and save it as Encapsulated Postscript in a file on
disk titled figure.ps to include in another document (i.e. \fBLaTeX\fP), use:
.PP
     XtoPS -geometry +0+0 figure.ps
.PP
To capture the entire X server screen as Encapsulated Postscript in a file on
disk titled root.ps, use:
.PP
     XtoPS -window root root.ps
.SH OPTIONS
\fIXtoPS\fP options can appear on the command line or in your X
resources file (see \fBX(1)\fP).  Options on the command line supersede
values specified in your X resources file.
.TP 5
.B "-border"
include image borders in the output image.
.TP 5
.B "-delay \fIseconds\fP"
pause before selecting target window.

This option is useful when you need time to ready the target window before
it is captured to a file.
.TP 5
.B "-display \fIhost:display[.screen]\fP"
specifies the X server to contact; see \fBX(1)\fP.
.TP 5
.B "-frame"
include window manager frame.
.TP 5
.B "-geometry \fI<width>x<height>{\+-}<x offset>{\+-}<y offset>\fP"
preferred size and location of the image on the Postscript page.
See \fBX(1)\fP for details about the geometry specification. By default, the
image is scaled and centered to fit on an 612x792 point Postscript page.

If the specified image size is smaller than the actual image size, the
image is first reduced to an integral of the specified image size with
an antialias digital filter.  The image is then scaled to the exact
specified image size with pixel replication.  If the specified image
size is greater than the actual image size, the image is first enlarged
to an integral of the specified image size with bilinear
interpolation.  The image is then scaled to the exact specified image
size with pixel replication.
.TP 5
.B "-monochrome"
transform image to black and white.
.TP 5
.B "-rotate \fIdegrees\fP"
apply Paeth image rotation to the image.

Empty triangles left over from rotating the image are filled with
the color defined by the pixel at location (0,0).

By default the image is output in portrait mode.  Use \fB-rotate 90\fP to
display the image in landscape mode.
.TP 5
.B "-scale \fI<width factor>x<height factor>\fP"
preferred size factors of the image.

This option behaves like \fB-geometry\fP except the width and height values
are relative instead of absolute.  The image size is multiplied by the
width and height factors to obtain the final image dimensions.  If only
one factor is specified, both the width and height factors assume the
value.

Factors may be fractional.  To increase the size of an image, use a
scale factor greater than 1.0.  To decrease an image's size, use a
scale factor less than 1.0.  Default is 1.0.
.TP 5
.B "-screen"
This option indicates that the GetImage request used to obtain the image
should be done on the root window, rather than directly on the specified
window.  In this way, you can obtain pieces of other windows that overlap
the specified window, and more importantly, you can capture menus or other
popups that are independent windows but appear over the specified window.
.TP 5
.B -verbose
print detailed information about the image.
 
This information is printed: image scene number;  image name;  image size;
the image class (\fIDirectClass\fP or \fIPseudoClass\fP);  the total
number of unique colors;  and the number of seconds to read and write the
image.
.TP 5
.B "-window \fIid\fP"
select window with this id or name.

With this option you can specify the target  window by id or name
rather than using the mouse.  Specify 'root' to select X's root window
as the target window.
.PP
Change \fI-\fP to \fI+\fP in any option above to reverse its effect.  For
example \fB+frame\fP means do not include window manager frame.
.PP
Specify \fIfile\fP as \fI-\fP for standard input or output.
.PP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
.TP 5
.B DISPLAY
To get the default host, display number, and screen.
.SH SEE ALSO
X(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1992 E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
.PP
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and
its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of E. I. du Pont de Nemours
& Company not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
distribution of the software without specific, written prior
permission.  E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company makes no representations
about the suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided
"as is" without express or implied warranty.
.PP
E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company disclaims all warranties with regard
to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness, in no event shall E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company be
liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any
damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether
in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising
out of or in connection with the use or performance of this software.
.SH AUTHORS
John Cristy, E.I. du Pont De Nemours & Company Incorporated

