.\"
.\"	Xkal : Graphical appointment calendar
.\"
.\"	George Ferguson, ferguson@cs.rochester.edu,  27 Oct 1990.
.\"	Version 1.1 - 27 Feb 1991.
.\"
.\"	$Id: xkal.man,v 2.2 91/03/13 13:36:09 ferguson Exp $
.\"
.TH XKAL 1 "26/10/90"
.ds ]W U of Rochester
.SH NAME
xkal \- graphical appointment calendar
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xkal
[X\ Toolkit\ options]
[-appoints\ filename]
[-date\ date]
[-listOnly]
[-silent]
[-numMonths\ 1|2|3|12]
[-[no]exitUsesLevels]
[-[no]bothShown]
[-[no]opaqueDates]
[-[no]dowLabels]
[-[no]titlebar]
[-version]
[-help]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Xkal is a graphical appointment calendar that allows you to maintain
many types of reminders, displays them in several different formats,
and allows you to add and edit them. Silent and non-graphic modes are
provided to allow xkal to be used to check for appointments without
interaction.
.PP
The general behaviour of xkal is to display one or more months. Clicking
Button1 on a particular day displays that day's reminder information,
either next to the month or in a popup window (see the
.B bothShown
resource, below). The reminders can be edited within this window, and
changes are automatically saved when the tool is exited. Changes can be
aborted or the appointments can be saved immediately using other actions.
Most available actions are provided by a set of menuButtons above the month
display. Clicking and holding on these buttons displays a menu from which the
desired action can be selected. (See below under Translation Actions for a
list of the actions and ways to customize xkal's behaviour.)
.PP
Reminders can come from two different sources:
.B system
reminders cannot be edited or deleted;
.B personal
reminders can. See below under OPTIONS, FILE FORMATS, and FILES for more
details about these files. When appointments conflict (ie. there is more
than one reminder that applies for a given day and time), xkal moves one
of them to a different time (see the
.B rearrangeSilently
resource).
.PP
Each reminder can have a "criticality level" associated with it, indicating
its importance. This is reflected in the month display by shading (on
monochrome displays) or coloring (on color displays) days depending on the
total criticality of their appointments. Typically, frequent or regular
reminders would be given level zero, and only more important or unique
reminders would influence the display (although they would all be displayed
when the day is selected).
.PP
Double-clicking on a reminder will pop up a window in which the entry can
be edited, changing things such as the criticality level as desired. Other
fields can also be changed, for example to make the reminder weekly or
monthly rather than for that specific day.
Clicking on the applyButton adds the appointment, the revertButton resets
the text items but does NOT undo the effects of previous "apply"s, the
deleteButton deletes any reminders matching the given information exactly,
and the dismissButton pops down the window.
.PP
Xkal is designed to be completely customizable. The section below,
CUSTOMIZING XKAL, describes the widget hierarchies and other relevant
resources to help with this. In particular, the relative positions of most
of xkal's main components is completely flexible. This version of xkal
also supports full customization of names for use with languages other than
English.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
The following non-widget resources can be set on the command line as well
as in a resource file. As usual, when given on the command line they can be
abbreviated to their shortest unique prefix, often the first letter.
Furthermore, xkal accepts all the standard X Toolkit options.
.IP "\fB-appoints\fP filename"
Uses the given filename as the name of the personal appointment file.
The format of this file is described below under FILE FORMATS. A leading
tilde (`~') is expanded to the value of $HOME. The default is `~/.appoints'.
This option corresponds to the resource
.BR personalAppoints .
.IP "\fB-date\fP date"
Changes xkal's notion of the current date (usually obtained from the
system). The date string should be as described below under DATE FORMATS,
with whitespace escaped if given on the command line.
.IP "\fB-listOnly\fP"
If given, then xkal simply lists the appointments and weekly reminders
to stdout, and exits without interaction. The exit status is the number of
appointments for the day. See also
.BR exitUsesLevels ,
below.
.IP "\fB-silent\fP"
Like above, but simply sets the exit status and doesn't print anything.
Useful for checking whether there are any appointments. See also
.BR -exitUsesLevels ,
below.
.IP "\fB-exitUsesLevels\fP"
If given, then the exit status returned in
.B listOnly
and
.B silent
modes is the total of the criticality levels of the day's appointments,
rather than the number of them.
.IP "\fB-noexitUsesLevels\fP"
The opposite of
.BR -exitUsesLevels.
The exit status is the number of appointments, rather than their
criticality total. This is the default.
.IP "\fB-numMonths\fP 1|3|12"
Determines whether xkal will start displaying one, three, or twelve months.
This can be changed while xkal is running using the
.B xkal-numMonths()
action described below under Translation Actions. The default is to show one
month.
.IP "\fB-bothShown\fP"
If given, then the day's appointments are displayed in the main tool
window, otherwise a popup window is created for them. When a day window is
popped up, it becomes the selected window and subsequent appointment updates
are done in it. It can be selected and deselected using the buttons. If no
popup window is selected when a day is clicked on, then a new popup window
will be created. The
.B Dismiss
button destroys the popup window. When this option is given (the default), no
popup windows are ever created.
.IP "\fB-nobothShown\fP"
The opposite of
.BR -bothShown .
.IP "\fB-opaqueDates\fP"
If given, then the numbers in the dayButtons are drawn opaquely, which
some people find easier to read when the day is stippled. This is the
default.
.IP "\fB-noopaqueDates\fP"
The opposite of
.BR -opaqueDates .
.IP "\fB-dowLabels\fP"
If given, labels are provided at the top of each column in each month
indicating the day of the week.
.IP "\fB-nodowLabels\fP"
The opposite of
.BR -dowLabels .
The default is
.BR nodowLabels .
.IP "\fB-titlebar\fP"
If true, the titlebar of the main window and any popup day windows is
changed to reflect the selected day. This is the default. This option
corresponds to the resource
.BR useTitlebar .
.IP "\fB-notitlebar\fP"
The opposite of
.BR -useTitlebar .
.IP "\fB-updateInterval\fP mins"
The number of minutes between automatic checkpointing (saving) of the
appointments. If this is zero, then no automatic checkpointing is done.
The default is to checkpoint every five minutes.
.IP "\fB-version\fP"
Prints the current version of xkal to stdout and exits.
.IP "\fB-help\fP"
Prints the usage message, summarizing these options.
.SH "CUSTOMIZING XKAL"
.PP
Xkal has a default set of resources built in. If you wish to customize the
tool, take a copy of the default application defaults file (see
FILES below) and modify it. Then, before invoking xkal, set the environment
variable
.B XAPPLRESDIR
to the directory containing your private copy. Alternatively, you can place
entries in your .Xdefaults file or provide them with the -xrm toolkit
option.
.SH "Other Non-Widget Resources"
.PP
The following resources customize xkal's file operations:
.IP "\fBsystemAppoints\fP"
The file for system (non-editable) reminders. Default is to not have a
system reminder file.
.IP "\fBbackupExtension\fP"
The suffix used when the personal appointments file is backed up before
saving it. If this is empty then the file is not backed up. The default is
to append a tilde (`~').
.IP "\fBoutputFormat\fP"
This resource specifies the desired "canonical" output format. It should
be a string with printf-style escapes that are replaced with parts of the
reminder as follows:
.nf
.na
	%w	short form of day of the week
	%W	long form of day of the week
	%d	day
	%m	short form of month
	%M	long form of month
	%n	numeric form of month
	%y	year
	%Y	year modulo 100
	%t	time
	%l	criticality level
	%~	space iff previous pattern was printed
	%/	slash iff previous pattern was printed
.ad
.fi
The default is "%w%~%d%~%m%~%y%~%t%~%l%~". Another possibility might be
"~%n%/%d%/%Y%~%w%~%t%~%l%~" (see
.BR daySlashMonth ,
below).
.IP "\fBdaySlashMonth\fP"
This resource controls how dates with slashes are interpreted. If it is
True, then these dates are interpreted as "day/month" or "day/month/year"
rather than the default "mon/day" or "mon/day/year".
.IP "\fBlevelDelim\fP"
This resource specifies the characters that, when encountered while parsing
a reminder, indicate its criticality level. If it is one character, then
that character is used for both the opening and the closing delimiter. The
default is to have the criticality level enclosed in ampersands (`@').
.IP "\fBdefaultLevel\fP"
The default criticality level for newly-created appointments. This can be
changed by editing the appointment. The default is one (`1').
.PP
The following resources customize various aspects of dates:
.IP "\fBlongDowStrings\fP"
This resource should be a whitespace-separated list of seven strings
(sorry, no escapes for blanks yet) specifying the full names
of the days of the week, in order from Sunday to Saturday.
.IP "\fBshortDowStrings\fP"
This resource specifies the seven abbreviated forms of the names of
the days of the week.
.IP "\fBlongMonthStrings\fP"
This resource specifies the twelve full names of the months, in order from
January to December.
.IP "\fBshortMonthStrings\fP"
This resource specifies the twelve abbreviated forms of the names of the
months.
.IP "\fBdowOffset\fP"
This resource specifies which day of the week is considered "first",
relative to the lists above. If it is zero (the default), then the first
string ("Sunday") is the first day of the week; if it is one, then the
second string ("Monday") is first (leftmost in a calendar). This resource
might not be needed as you could probably just rearrange the strings.
.PP
The following resources customize the appearance of the day's reminders:
.IP "\fBappsStartTime\fP"
Specifies the time of the earliest entry for a day. It should be of the
form "hours:mins", with optional "am" or "pm" indicator. The "mins" field
(with colon) is optional. The default is "8:00".
.IP "\fBappsEndTime\fP"
Specifies the time of the latest entry for a day. The default is "17:00".
.IP "\fBappsIncrement\fP"
Specifies the interval between entries. The default is ":30".
.IP "\fBappsUseAmPm\fP"
If True, then reminder slots are labelled in 12-hour (with "am" or "pm")
notation, rather than the default 24-hour form.
.IP "\fBnumNotes\fP"
Specifies the number of entries that are not associated with a time. The
default is two (`2').
.IP "\fBnotesLabel\fP"
Specifies the label for those entries without a time. The default is
"NOTES".
.IP "\fBnoonStr\fP"
Specifies the string used for representing 12:00. The default is "Noon".
When
.B appsUseAmPm
is True this string is used to label the appropriate slot. The string
is also understood in reminder files (so be careful when changing it or
old files written with
.B appsUseAmPm
True will not be readable).
.IP "\fBmidnightStr\fP"
Like
.B noonStr
but specifies the string used for representing 0:00. The default is "Midnight".
.IP "\fBrearrangeSilently\fP"
When two or more reminders are specified for the same time (either
because they are from different files or because one or more is weekly
or monthly or whatever), xkal will move some of the reminders to other
slots. If this resource is True, then it will do so without indicating it.
If False (the default), then it will indicate the original time in square
brackets before the text of the reminder. If there is an reminder for a
time for which there is no slot, then this reminder is moved to the notes
section and labelled as above.
.PP
The following resources control how criticality levels are reflected in the
calendar display. Where bitmaps are to be specified, they can either be
absolute pathnames or else are taken relative to the global resource
.BR bitmapFilePath .
See
.BR XmuLocateBitmapFile (3X)
for details.
.IP "\fBnoDayShade\fP"
Specifies the bitmap for shading boxes that do not correspond to a day in
that month. These boxes are not selectable, obviously. Default is
"cross_weave".
.IP "\fBmaxLevel\fP"
Specifies the number of different levels of criticality that can be
displayed. Levels greater than this use the maximum level. The default is
seven (`7').
.IP "\fBshades\fP"
This resource should be a whitespace-separated list of bitmap names. They
will be used with monochrome displays to shade the day appropriately. Days
for which the total reminder criticality is 1 will use the first shade,
etc. If fewer than
.B maxLevel
bitmaps are given then the last entry is used for levels for which none was
given. The default is a series of gray shades.
.IP "\fBcolors\fP"
Like
.BR shades ,
but specifies the colors to be used with color displays. The default is
green, blue, and yellow for two levels each, then red for the rest.
.SH "Widget Hierarchy"
.PP
Xkal uses standard Athena widgets which can be customized as usual.
Some of the resources used to describe the widgets must be given as
non-widget resources due to problems with the creation/realization order.
These are identified below and in the resource file.
The widget hierarchy is as follows:

.ta 8,12,16,20,24,28,32,36,40
.na
.nf
	TopLevelShell Xkal
		Form bothForm
			MenuButton fileButton,viewButton,otherButton
			Form allMonthsForm
			Form dayForm [if \fBbothShown\fP is True]
.fi
.ad

The Form widget
.B allMonthsForm
contains the months, depending on the value of the
.B numMonths
resource these will be one, three, or twelve Forms named
.BR monthForm1 ,
.B monthForm3
or
.BR monthForm12
respectively. This separation of specification allows each type of display
to be customized separately. Each monthForm will contain a Label
.BR MonthLabel X
(where X is 1, 3, or 12) and Toggles for the days named
.BR dayButton X.
In order to correctly allocate pixmaps, the size of these buttons must be
set in the non-widget resources
.BR dateWidth X
and
.BR dateHeight X,
rather than using the width and height resources of the
.BR dayButton X.
The printing of the date in the
.B dayButton
is controlled by the non-widget resources
.BR dateFont X
and
.BR datePosition X;
this last should be a geometry string of the form `+x+y' taken as an offset
from the top left corner of the button.
.PP
If
.B bothShown
is not True, then the popup window looks like

.na
.nf
	TopLevelShell popupDayShell
		Form popupDayForm
			Command dismissButton
			Command selectButton
			Command unselectButton
			Form dayForm
.fi
.ad
.PP
In either case, the
.B dayForm
contains a Label
.B dayLabel
(to display the date), and enough instances of pairs of: a Label
.B appointLabel
to display the time of the appointment and an AsciiText
.B appointText
for displaying and editing the appointment itself. The number of these is
of course determined by the resources
.BR appsStartTime ,
.BR appsEndTime ,
.BR appsIncrement ,
and the like (see above).
The relative positions of these are hard-coded and so cannot be
changed using resources.
.PP
Xkal provides three menuButtons on the main window, called
.BR fileButton ,
.BR viewButton ,
and
.BR otherButton .
They are all children of
.BR bothForm .
Since
.B allMonthsForm
and
.B dayForm
(if
.B bothShown
is True) are also children of
.BR bothForm ,
the buttons can be placed arbitrarily in the tool. The corresponding
ezMenu widgets
.BR fileMenu ,
.BR viewMenu ,
and
.BR otherMenu
can be customized to provide other actions if desired (see
.BR ezMenu (3)).
.PP
When the
.B xkal-edit-appoint()
action is invoked (by default by double-clicking on a reminder or its
label), a window is popped up to allow the selected reminder
to be edited. This widget hierarchy is:

.nf
.na
	TopLevelShell editShell
		Form editForm
			Command applyButton
			Command revertButton
			Command deleteButton
			Command dismissButton
			Label,Text dow{Label,Text}
			Label,Text day{Label,Text}
			Label,Text mon{Label,Text}
			Label,Text year{Label,Text}
			Label,Text time{Label,Text}
			Label,Text level{Label,Text}
.ad
.fi

Clicking on the applyButton adds the appointment, the revertButton resets
the text items but does NOT undo the effects of previous "apply"s, the
deleteButton deletes any reminders matching the given information exactly,
and the dismissButton pops down the window. The effects of these buttons
can be bound to different events using the
.B notify()
action.
.PP
When the
.B xkal-edit-defaults()
action is invoked (by default by selecting "Edit defaults" from the Other
menu), a window is popped up to allow some of the application defaults
to be edited. This widget hierarchy is:

.nf
.na
	TopLevelShell defaultsShell
		Form defaultsForm
			Command applyButton
			Command revertButton
			Command dismissButton
			Label,Text personalAppoints{Label,Text}
			Label,Text backupExtension{Label,Text}
			Label,Text date{Label,Text}
			Label,Text numMonths{Label,Text}
			Label,Text checkpointInterval{Label,Text}
			Label,Text rearrangeSilently{Label,Text}
			Label,Text defaultLevel{Label,Text}
			Label,Text levelDelim{Label,Text}
.ad
.fi

Clicking on the applyButton sets the application defaults from the
appropriately labelled item, the revertButton resets
the text items but does NOT undo the effects of previous "apply"s,
and the dismissButton pops down the window. The effects of these buttons
can be bound to different events using the
.B notify()
action. There is unfortunately no way to save defaults edited in this
way; you have to modify the resource file yourself.

.SH "Translation Actions"
.PP
The following action procedures are registered for xkal and can be bound
to widget events using the
.B translations
resource (see the Xt manual, Appendix C). Certain actions are hard-coded
to widgets (for example, setting the dayForm when a dayButton is
clicked on) since they are so essential to correct behaviour. They can be
bound to different events using the
.B notify()
action.
.IP \fBxkal-quit()\fP
Update the appointments file, destroy the tool, and exit with status 0.
By default this is performed by selecting
.B Quit
from the File menu, or typing `q' in a dayButton.
.IP \fBxkal-exit()\fP
Destroy the tool and exit without saving any changes to the
appointments file. By default this is bound to selecting
.B Exit
from the File menu, and to `x' in the dayButtons.
.IP \fBxkal-save()\fP
Updates the appointments file, saving any changes. By default, this is
invoked by the
.B Save
entry of the File menu, or by typing `s'. See also the resources
.B backupExtension
and
.BR checkpointInterval .
.IP \fBxkal-next()\fP
If
.B numMonths
is 1 or 3, this action will move the month display ahead to the next month.
If
.B numMonths
is 12, it will move to the next year. By default this is provided by the
.B Next
entry of the View menu, or by typing `n' in the dayButtons.
.IP \fBxkal-prev()\fP
Like above, but moves back one month or year. By default this is provided
by the
.B Prev
entry of the View menu, and by typing `p'.
.IP \fBxkal-today()\fP
Selects the current date. Note that this can be altered by the
.B -date
flag or set using the defaults editor.
By default this is available from the View menu or by typing `t'.
Note that if xkal's notion of the current date comes form the system (ie.
was not given by the
.B date
resource) then it will recheck the current system date whenever this action
is invoked, in case it has been running for a long time.
.IP \fBxkal-numMonths(\fPnum\fB)\fP
Set the month display to 1, 3, or 12, depending on the value of `num'.
This is provided by default by the three appropriately entries of the
View menu, and by typing `1', `3', and `12' (ie. `1' then `2' "fast enough")
respectively.
.IP \fBxkal-edit-appoint()\fP
This action should be bound to either an appointLabel or an appointText
widget. It pops up the reminder editor (if it is not already up) and sets
the text items in it from the current appointment. See the description of
its widget hierarchy above for details of how the editor works. By default
this is bound to double-clicking on an appointLabel or appointText.
.IP \fBxkal-edit-defaults()\fP
Pops up the defaults editor (if it is not already up).
See the description of its widget hierarchy above for details of how the
editor works. By default this is available from the Other menu or by typing
`e' in a dayButton.
.IP \fBxkal-system(\fPcmd\fB)\fP
This action provides a general escape mechanism. The argument will be
passed to the shell for execution using
.BR system (3).
You might use this, for example, to automatically run a filter over your
appointment file every time it is saved. To do this, replace any translations
using
.B xkal-save()
with

.ce 1
.BR xkal-save() , xkal-system( script ).

You could also provide additional escapes on the Other menu, or even pop up
an xterm to do something more long-lived. By default, the Other menu's
"Help" item pops up an xterm with this man page using this action.
.SH "FILE FORMAT"
.PP
Xkal understands almost any kind of date in its appointment files.
Reminders consist of the date, time, and level specifiers, followed by
the text of the reminder, one reminder per line. Fields should be separated
by whitespace. Leading whitespace and lines beginning with `#' are ignored
with the exception that is a line is of the form

.nf
.na
	#include filename
.ad
.fi

then xkal reads the specified file (no quotes or brackets, filename taken
to end-of-line) at that point.
.PP
The following specifiers are understood; the text of the reminder is
assumed to start when none of these apply (so be careful about reminders
that start with numbers). In the following table `#' indicates a string of
digits:

.ta 8,16,24,32,40
.na
.nf
	#:#	=	hours:mins (24hr)
	#:#	=	hours:mins (24hr)
	#:#am	=	hours:mins
	#:#pm	=	hours+12:mins
	#/#	=	month/day (depends on \fBdaySlashMonth\fP)
	#/#/#	=	month/day/year ("   "        "     )
	#am	=	hours
	#pm	=	hours (+12)
	# <= 31	=	day
	# > 31	=	year
	@#@	=	level (depends on \fBlevelDelim\fP)
.fi
.ad

In addition, either long or short forms of the days of the week or of
the months are understood (see
.BR longDowStrings ,
etc.).
.PP
Any of the fields can be omitted from a reminder's date. The decision as to
whether a reminder applies to a particular day is made using the following
(hopefully intuitive) algorithm:
.IP -
If no time is given for the reminder, then it is taken to belong in
the Notes section.
.IP -
If the reminder does not specify a day of the week, then the day, month,
and year must match if given, otherwise they are assumed to match. For
example:
.na
.nf
	25 Dec Christmas of every year
	Nov 13 1991 My 26th birthday
	Mar Every day in March
	1 The first day of every month
.fi
.ad
.IP -
If the reminder specifies a day of the week but no day, the the day of the
week of the day in question must match, and the month and year must match
if given. For example:
.na
.nf
	Wed 11:00 My weekly Wednesday meeting
	Fri Mar 1991 Every Friday in March, 1991
.fi
.ad
.IP -
If both a day of the week and a day are given, then the interpretation is
"the first day of the week on or after the given day". For example
(assuming the actual calendar):
.na
.nf
	Wed 1 February 1991 This matches Feb 6, 1991
	Fri 14 1991 Matches Jan 18, Feb 15, Mar 15, ...
.fi
.ad
.PP
Although this is not totally flexible, it is hoped that it will cover the
vast majority of cases efficiently (since the algorithm must be performed
often during execution).

.SH "DATE FORMAT"
.PP
When using the
.B date
resource to change xkal's notion of the current date, the value of the
resource can be either an absolute or a relative date, as follows.
.IP -
A relative date begins with either `+' or `-' followed by any
amount of `number'`specifer' pairs where `specifier' is one of
`d', `m', or `y' indicating days, months, and years respectively.
Xkal's current date is set to the current system date offset by the relative
date. For example:

	% xkal -listOnly -date +1d

would list tomorrow's reminders, and

	% xkal -date +1d1y

would start interaction at the day one year from tomorrow. If a number without
a specifier terminates a date, the specifier is taken to be `d' (so `+1' is the
same as `+1d').
.IP -
An absolute date is specified by giving any of the day, month, or year desired,
using the same formats as for appointment files (see above). Note that
years less than 1900 have no meaning in UNIX and years less than 1970 will
confuse the system time routines. Thus

	% xkal -date 25Dec\ \ and\ \ % xkal -date Dec25

specify Christmas of the current year,

	% xkal -date 'Dec 1925'

specifies today's day in December of 1925, and

	% xkal -date 25Dec1925

specifies Christmas Day, 1925. Note that spaces are allowed within a date
but must be escaped from the shell if given on the command line.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
XAPPLRESDIR	- Directory containing xkal resource file
.SH FILES
.PP
.nf
.na
~/.appoints		- default appointment file
$LIBDIR/xkal.appoints	- default system appintment file
$XAPPLRESDIR/Xkal	- default xkal resource file
.ad
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.PP
Xkal complains about incorrectly formatted appoinment entries, specifying
the exact location of the error. These messages go to stderr.
.PP
Other error messages will either result in popup windows or messages to
standard error.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
X(1),
kal(1),
cal(1),
calend(1),
calendar(1).
.SH BUGS
.PP
Xkal will not think the appointments have changed unless a key has been
pressed in one of the appointText widgets. Thus, pasting a selection into
one of these will work, but you will have to hit a key (eg. Return) before
attempting to save or switch days.
.PP
When invoked in one of the non-interactive modes, a custom resource parser
is used to avoid opening an X connection. This parser does not understand
the "-xrm" resource specifiers. This should not be a problem since all
resources relevant to these modes can be specified with command line
options instead.
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
George Ferguson, University of Rochester
.br
(ferguson@cs.rochester.edu)
