.TH xpaint l
.SH Name
xpaint \- Simple Paint program
.SH Syntax
.B xpaint
[
.I file...
]
.br
.SH Description
.PN xpaint
is a simple straight forward bitmap editing program.  It is designed to
read and write either PPM or XBM format images.  
.PP
XPaint is broken up into two major components:  the toolbox, used for
selection of an operation; and image areas, where actual editing
takes place.  
.SH Toolbox
The toolbox window is displayed when xpaint is started.  The toolbox is
used to select an operation which can then be applied to any image area
presented (painting window, fat bits, pattern editor, etc.).  The window
has a selection of painting operations (as icons) and four pull down 
menus:  "File", "Brush", "Line" and "Font".
.I Icons
Click on the painting operation that you are interested in performing on
the canvas.  Can be one of: Brush, Spray, Pencil, Line, Arc, Fill, Text,
Select Rectangle, Select Area, Box, Filled Box, Oval, Filled Oval, 
Connected Line, Polygon, or Filled Polygon.  Both Box, and Oval support 
holding down the shift key to provide for Square and Circle operations.
.TP 1i
.B "File"
The file menu allows you to create either a default sized canvas
(512x512) or choose the size that you wish.  You can also read an
existing image from disk via the "Open" option.
.TP 1i
.B "Font"
Choose the font you are interested in via one of the default choices or use
the browser.
.TP 1i
.B "Line"
Choose either a given line width or input a value via a dialog box.  Widths 
must be between 1 and 1000.
.TP 1i
.B "Brush"
The brush menu has two choices: change the brush style or the spray paint 
gun.  If the brush operation is currently selected, the new brush style 
is applied immediately when clicked upon.  The spray paint gun may be
changed by modifying the radius area and density parameters.
.SH Painting Window
The painting window contains a canvas where editing of the image 
takes place and a pattern area for selecting the current color/pattern.  It
should be fairly simple to figure out what to do.  Given any selected tool
from the toolbox, it will paint upon the image with the current pattern.
.TP 1i
.I Canvas
The canvas is where the selected tool is applied to the current image.
.TP 1i
.I Patterns
The pattern area presently contains two parts: a set of solid colors 
(on a color display) and a set of black and white patterns.  The two buttons 
start the Pattern Editor (described below) to change or add patterns for 
the current session.
.TP 1i
.B File
The file menu allows you to save either the whole image or a region (if 
one is selected).  Additionally, this is where the close window option 
is located.
.TP 1i
.B Edit
You can either undo the last action that you performed, or cut/copy/paste 
the current selected region.  It is possible to cut images between different 
painting windows, if you wish.
.TP 1i
.B Image
This menu allows you to change the current zoom factor for the editing area 
or the image size.  Additionally, the grid (snap) can be set or unset and 
the grid spacing changed.
.SH Pattern Editor
This window is presented when adding a new pattern to the system, or 
editing an existing pattern.  It functions very similarly to the standard 
painting window.  It includes it's own "Palette" region, where 
you can select (and change) the current color map for the image and pattern.
.TP 1i
.I Canvas
This is simply a zoomed version of the pattern, all standard operations
apply to it.
.TP 1i
.I Palette
The palette area consists of two parts: all the available colors that 
which can be applied to the current pattern; and a set of sliders to 
adjust the red, green, and blue values of the currently selected color.
.TP 1i
.B File
File is primarily to \fBLoad\fR existing patterns off disk, 
or to \fBSave\fR the
current pattern to the disk.  Any image may be loaded as a pattern, but
will be truncated to a 32x32 image.  \fBClose\fR from the file menu is the
same as saying ok, which applies your changes to the current pattern.
.TP 1i
.B Edit
See the edit under the Painting Window section.
.TP 1i
.I Ok, Cancel
Ok applies changes or additions to the current patterns and exits.  Cancel
aborts any changes that have been made during the Pattern Editor session.
.SH Author
David Koblas, koblas@netcom.com.  
I am interested in how this program is used, if you find any bugs, I'll 
fix them.  If you notice any rough spots, or think of some way in which 
it could be better, feel free to drop me a message.
