@c -*-tex-*-
@unnumbered Acknowledgements

Certain sections in this booklet are not my original work---rather,
they are derived from documents that were available on the Internet
and already aptly stated their areas of concentration.  The chapter on
Usenet is, in large part, made up of what's posted monthly to
@code{news.announce.newusers}, with some editing and rewriting.  Also,
the main section on @var{archie} was derived from @file{whatis.archie}
by Peter Deutsch of the McGill University Computing Centre.  It's
available via anonymous FTP from @code{archie.mcgill.ca}.  Much of
what's in the telnet section came from an impressive introductory
document put together by SuraNet.  Some definitions in the one are
from an excellent glossary put together by Colorado State University.

This guide would not be the same without the aid of many people on The
Net, and the providers of resources that are already out there.  I'd
like to thank the folks who gave this a read-through and returned some
excellent comments, suggestions, and criticisms, and those who
provided much-needed information on the fly.  Glee Willis deserves
particular mention for all of his work; this guide would have been
considerably less polished without his help.

@iftex
@vskip .25truein
@end iftex
@itemize @bullet
@item
@c Andy Blankenbiller <rablanke@crdec7.apgea.army.mil>
Andy Blankenbiller, Army at Aberdeen
@item
@c bajan@cs.mcgill.ca
Alan Emtage, McGill University Computer Science Department
@item
@c Brian Fitzgerald <fitz@mml0.meche.rpi.edu>
Brian Fitzgerald, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
@item
@c John Goetsch <ccjg@hippo.ru.ac.za>
John Goetsch, Rhodes University, South Africa
@item
@c composer@chem.bu.edu
Jeff Kellem, Boston University's Chemistry Department
@item
@c kraussW@moravian.edu
Bill Krauss, Moravian College
@item
@c Steve Lodin <deaes!swlodin@iuvax.cs.indiana.edu>
Steve Lodin, Delco Electronics
@item
@c Mike Nesel <nesel@elxsi.dfrf.nasa.gov>
Mike Nesel, NASA
@item
@c Bob <neveln@cs.widener.edu>
Bob Neveln, Widener University Computer Science Department
@item
@c wamapi@dunkin.cc.mcgill.ca (Wanda Pierce)
Wanda Pierce, McGill University Computing Centre
@item
@c Joshua.R.Poulson@cyber.widener.edu
Joshua Poulson, Widener University Computing Services
@item
@c de5@ornl.gov
Dave Sill, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
@item
@c bsmart@bsmart.tti.com
Bob Smart, CitiCorp/TTI
@item
@c emv@msen.com
Ed Vielmetti, Vice President of MSEN
@item
@c Craig E. Ward <cew@venera.isi.edu>
Craig Ward, USC/Information Sciences Institute (ISI)
@item
@c Glee Willis <willis@unssun.nevada.edu>
Glee Willis, University of Nevada, Reno
@item
@c Charles Yamasaki <chip@oshcomm.osha.gov>
Chip Yamasaki, OSHA
@end itemize
