@c -*-tex-*-
@c - getting to other networks
@c - retrieving files by mail
@c - creating a new newsgroup

@node Getting to Other Networks
@appendix Getting to Other Networks
@c an abbreviated version of the internetworking guide here

Inter-connectivity has been and always will be one of the biggest
goals in computer networking.  The ultimate desire is to make it so
one person can contact anyone else no matter where they are.  A number
of ``gateways'' between networks have been set up.  They include:
@cindex gateway, mail--news

@c xxx need to add sprintnet, omnet, and dialcom to the table (email)
@c	(Although Dialcom doesn't have a general relay, some of their
@c	customers do, e.g. CGNET, UN Development Programme and American
@c	Library Association, through the ISI Commercial Mail Relay (RFC-1168).
@c xxx mention that some don't have relays (e.g.  GEnie) (email)
@table @rm
@itemx AppleLink
@cindex AppleLink
Quantum Services sells access to @dfn{AppleLink}, which is similar to
QuantumLink for Commodore computers and PCLink for IBM PCs and
compatibles.  It also provides email access through the address
@samp{@var{user}@@applelink.apple.com}.

@itemx ATTMail
AT&T sells a commercial email service called @dfn{ATTMail}.  Its users
can be reached by writing to @samp{@var{user}@@attmail.com}.

@itemx BIX
Users on BIX (the Byte Information eXchange) can be reached
through the DAS gateway at @samp{@var{user}@@dcibix.das.net}.

@itemx CompuServe (CI$)
@cindex CompuServe
To reach a user on the commercial service @dfn{CompuServe}, you must
address the mail as @code{@var{xxxxx.xxx}@@compuserve.com}, with
@var{xxxxx.xxx} being their CompuServe user ID.  Normally CompuServe
ids are represented as being separated by a comma (like
@code{71999,141}); since most mailers don't react well to having
commas in addresses, it was changed to a period.  For the above
address, mail would be sent to @samp{71999.141@@compuserve.com}.

@itemx EasyNet
Digital sells a service called EasyNet; users that subscribe to it can
be reached with the addresses @code{@var{user}@@host.enet.dec.com} or
@samp{@var{user}%host.enet@@decwrl.dec.com}.

@itemx FidoNet
The FidoNet computer network can be reached by using a special
addressing method.  If John Smith is on the node @samp{1:2/3.4} on
FidoNet, his or her email address would be
@samp{john.smith@@p@strong{4}.f@strong{3}.n@strong{2}.z@strong{1}.fidonet.org}
(notice how the numbers fall in place?).

@itemx MCI Mail
@cindex MCI Mail
MCI also sells email accounts (similar to ATTMail). Users can be
reached with @samp{@var{user}@@mcimail.com}.

@itemx PeaceNet
@c get more info on this..
Users on the PeaceNet network can be reached by writing to
@samp{@var{user}@@igc.org}.

@c @itemx The Well
@c Users on the service The Well can be reached by writing to
@c @samp{@var{user}@@well.sf.ca.us}.  The Well is directly connected to the Internet.
@end table

@cindex FTPable Items
This table is far from complete.  In addition to sites not being
listed, some services are not (nor do they plan to be) accessible from
the ``outside'' (like Prodigy); others, like GEnie, are actively
investigating the possibility of creating a gateway into their system.
For the latest information, consult a list called the
@cite{Inter-Network Mail Guide}.  It's available from a number of FTP
sites, including UUNET; @pxref{Anonymous FTP}, for more information on
getting a copy of it using anonymous FTP.

@node Retrieving Files via Email
@appendix Retrieving Files via Email

For those who have a connection to the Internet, but cannot FTP, there
do exist a few alternatives to get those files you so desperately
need.  When requesting files, it's imperative that you keep in mind
the size of your request---odds are the other people who may be using
your link won't be too receptive to sudden bursts of really heavy
traffic on their normally sedate connection.

@node Archive Servers
@unnumberedsec Archive Servers
@c XXX (archive servers): this should probably have more to it,
@c like Jason, etc

An alternative to the currently well over-used FTPmail system is
taking advantage of the many @dfn{archive servers} that are presently
being maintained.  These are programs that receive email messages that
contain commands, and act on them.  For example, sending an archive
server the command @samp{help} will usually yield, in the form of a
piece of email, information on how to use the various commands that
the server has available.

One such archive server is @samp{service@@nic.ddn.mil}.  Maintained by
the Network Information Center (NIC) in Chantilly, VA, the server is
set up to make all of the information at the NIC available for people
who don't have access to FTP.  This also includes the WHOIS service
(@pxref{Whois}). Some sample @samp{Subject:} lines for queries to the
NIC server are:

@smallexample
Subject: help                          @var{Describes available commands.}
Subject: rfc 822                       @var{Sends a copy of RFC-822.}
Subject: rfc index                     @var{Sends an index of the available RFCs.}
Subject: netinfo domain-template.txt   @var{Sends a domain application.}
Subject: whois widener                 @var{Sends WHOIS information on `widener'.}
@end smallexample

More information on using their archive server can be obtained by
writing to their server address @code{service@@nic.ddn.mil} with a
@samp{Subject:} of @kbd{help}.

There are different ``brands'' of archive server, each with its own
set of commands and services.  Among them there often exists a common
set of commands and services (e.g. @samp{index}, @samp{help}, etc).
Be that as it may, one should always consult the individual help for a
specific server before assuming the syntax---100K surprises can be
hard on a system.

@node FTP-by-Mail Servers
@unnumberedsec FTP-by-Mail Servers
Some systems offer people the ability to receive files through a
mock-FTP interface via email.  @xref{Anonymous FTP} for a general overview of
how to FTP.  The effects of providing such a service varies, although
a rule of thumb is that it will probably use a substantial amount of
the available resources on a system.

@cindex BITFTP
The ``original'' FTP-by-Mail service, BITFTP, is available to BITNET
users from the Princeton node @code{PUCC}.  It was once accessible to
anyone, but had to be closed out to non-BITNET users because of the
heavy load on the system.

In response to this closure, Paul Vixie designed and installed a
system called FTPmail on one of Digital's gateway computers,
@code{decwrl.dec.com}.  Write to @samp{ftpmail@@decwrl.dec.com} with
@samp{help} in the body of the letter for instructions on its use.
The software is undergoing constant development; once it reaches a
stable state, other sites will be encouraged to adopt it and provide
the service also.
@cindex help, with FTPmail

@c From ``How to Create a New Newsgroup'', posted periodically.
@node Newsgroup Creation
@appendix Newsgroup Creation

Everyone has the opportunity to make a @dfn{Call For Votes} on the
Usenet and attempt to create a newsgroup that he/she feels would be of
benefit to the general readership.  The rules governing newsgroup
creation have evolved over the years into a generally accepted method.
They only govern the ``world'' groups; they aren't applicable to
regional or other alternative hierarchies.

@node Discussion, Voting, Creation, Creation
@unnumberedsec Discussion

A discussion must first take place to address issues like the naming
of the group, where in the group tree it should go (e.g.
@code{rec.sports.koosh} vs @code{rec.games.koosh}?), and whether or
not it should be created in the first place.  The formal @dfn{Request
For Discussion} (RFD) should be posted to
@code{news.announce.newgroups}, along with any other groups or mailing
lists at all related to the proposed topic.
@code{news.announce.newgroups} is moderated.  You should place it
first in the @samp{Newsgroups:} header, so that it will get mailed to
the moderator @emph{only}.  The article won't be immediately posted to
the other newsgroups listed; rather, it will give you the opportunity
to have the moderator correct any inconsistencies or mistakes in your
RFD.  He or she will take care of posting it to the newsgroups you
indicated.  Also the @samp{Followup-To:} header will be set so that the
actual discussion takes place only in @code{news.groups}.  If a user
has difficulty posting to a moderated group, he or she may mail
submissions intended for @code{news.announce.newgroups} to the address
@samp{announce-newgroups@@rpi.edu}.

The final name and @dfn{charter} of the group, and whether it will be
moderated or unmoderated, will be determined during the discussion
period.  If it's to be moderated, the discussion will also decide who
the moderator will be.  If there's no general agreement on these
points among those in favor of a new group at the end of 30 days,
the discussion will be taken into mail rather than continued posting
to @code{news.groups}; that way, the proponents of the group can iron out
their differences and come back with a proper proposal, and make
a new Request For Discussion.
@cindex moderation, of newsgroups

@node Voting, Results, Discussion, Creation
@unnumberedsec Voting
After the discussion period (which is mandatory), if it's been
determined that a new group really is desired, a name and charter are
agreed upon, and it's been determined whether the group will be
moderated (and by whom), a @dfn{Call For Votes} (CFV) should be posted
to @code{news.announce.newgroups}, along with any other groups that
the original Request For Discussion was posted to.  The CFV should be
posted (or mailed to the @code{news.announce.newgroups} moderator) as
soon as possible after the discussion ends (to keep it fresh in
everyone's mind).

The Call for Votes should include clear instructions on how to cast a
vote.  It's important that it be clearly explained how to both vote
for @emph{and} against a group (and be of equivalent difficulty or
ease).  If it's easier for you or your administrator, two separate
addresses can be used to mail yes and no votes to, providing that
they're on the same machine.  Regardless of the method, everyone
must have a very specific idea of how to get his/her vote counted.

The voting period can last between 21 and 31 days, no matter what the
preliminary results of the vote are.  A vote can't be called off
simply because 400 ``no'' votes have come in and only two ``yes''
votes.  The Call for Votes should include the exact date that the
voting period will end---only those votes arriving on the vote-taker's
machine before this date can be counted.

To keep awareness high, the CFV can be repeated during the vote,
provided that it gives the same clear, unbiased instructions for
casting a vote as the original; it also has to be the same proposal as
was first posted.  The charter can't change in mid-vote. Also, votes
that're posted don't count---only those that were mailed to the
vote-taker can be tallied.

Partial results should @emph{never} be included; only a statement of
the specific proposal, that a vote is in progress on it, and how to
cast a vote.  A mass acknowledgement (``Mass ACK'' or ``Vote ACK'') is
permitted; however, it must be presented in a way that gives no
indication of which way a person voted.  One way to avoid this is to
create one large list of @emph{everyone} who's voted, and sort it in
alphabetical order.  It should not be two sorted lists (of the yes and
no votes, respectively).

Every vote is autonomous.  The votes for or against one group can't be
transferred to another, similar proposal.  A vote can only count for
the @emph{exact} proposal that it was a response to.  In particular, a vote
for or against a newsgroup under one name can't be counted as a vote
for or against another group with a different name or charter, a
different moderated/unmoderated status, or, if it's moderated, a
different moderator or set of moderators.  Whew!
@cindex moderation, of newsgroups

Finally, the vote has to be explicit; they should be of the form @samp{I
vote for the group foo.bar as proposed} or @samp{I vote against the group
foo.bar as proposed}.  The wording doesn't have to be exact, your
intention just has to be clear.

@node Results, Creating the Group, Voting, Creation
@unnumberedsec The Result of a Vote

At the end of the voting period, the vote-taker has to post (to
@code{news.announce.newgroups}) the tally and email addresses of the votes
received.  Again, it can also be posted to any of the groups listed in
the original CFV.  The tally should make clear which way a person
voted, so the results can be verified if it proves necessary to do so.

After the vote result is posted to @code{news.announce.newgroups},
there is a mandatory five-day waiting period.  This affords everyone
the opportunity to correct any errors or inconsistencies in the voter
list or the voting procedure.

@node Creating the Group,  , Results, Creation
@unnumberedsec Creation of the Group

If, after the waiting period, there are no serious objections that
might invalidate the vote, the vote is put to the ``water test.''  If
there were 100 more valid @samp{YES/create} votes than @samp{NO/don't}
create votes, @emph{and} at least two-thirds of the total number of votes are
in favor of creation, then a newgroup control message can be sent out
(often by the moderator of @code{news.announce.newgroups}).  If the 100-vote
margin or the two-thirds percentage isn't met, the group has failed
and can't be created.

If the proposal failed, all is not lost---after a six-month waiting
period (a ``cooling down''), a new Request For Discussion can be posted
to @code{news.groups}, and the whole process can start over again.  If after
a couple of tries it becomes obvious that the group is @emph{not}
wanted or needed, the vote-taker should humbly step back and accept
the opinion of the majority.  (As life goes, so goes Usenet.)
