@c -*-tex-*-
@unnumbered Bibliography
@node Bibliography

What follows is a compendium of sources that have information that
will be of use to anyone reading this guide.  Most of them were used
in the writing of the booklet, while others are simply noted because
they are a must for any good net.citizen's bookshelf.

@section Books
@tex
\def\book#1#2#3#4#5{{\bf#1}\ (#5).\ \ {\it#2}.  #3: #4.}

\book{Comer, Douglas E.}
	{Internetworking With TCP/IP, 2nd ed., {\rm 2v}}
	{Prentice Hall}
	{Englewood Cliffs, NJ}
	{1991}

\book{Davidson, John}
	{An Introduction to TCP/IP}
	{Springer-Verlag}
	{Berlin}
	{1988}

\book{Frey, Donnalyn, {\rm and} Adams, Rick}
	{!{\char`\@}\%:: A Directory of Electronic Mail Addressing and Networks}
	{O'Reilly and Associates}
	{Newton, MA}
	{1989}

\book{Gibson, William}
	{Neuromancer}
	{Ace}
	{New York, NY}
	{1984}

\book{LaQuey, Tracy}
	{Users' Directory of Computer Networks}
	{Digital Press}
	{Bedford, MA}
	{1990}

\book{Levy, Stephen}
	{Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution}
	{Anchor Press/Doubleday}
	{Garden City, NY}
	{1984}

\book{Partridge, Craig}
	{Innovations in Internetworking}
	{ARTECH House}
	{Norwood, MA}
	{1988}

\book{Quarterman, John S.}
	{The Matrix: Computer Networks and Conferencing Systems Worldwide}
	{Digital Press}
	{Bedford, MA}
	{1989}

\book{Raymond, Eric (ed)}
	{The New Hacker's Dictionary}
        {MIT Press}
        {Cambridge, MA}
        {1991}

\book{Stoll, Clifford}
	{The Cuckoo's Egg}
	{Doubleday}
	{New York}
	{1989}

\book{Tanenbaum, Andrew S.}
	{Computer Networks, 2d ed}
	{Prentice-Hall}
	{Englewood Cliffs, NJ}
	{1988}

\book{Todinao, Grace}
	{Using UUCP and USENET: A Nutshell Handbook}
	{O'Reilly and Associates}
	{Newton, MA}
	{1986}

\book{The Waite Group}
	{Unix Communications, 2nd ed.}
	{Howard W. Sams \& Company}
	{Indianapolis}
	{1991}
@end tex

@section Periodicals & Papers
@tex
\def\ibid{\indent\hbox{\hbox to 3em{\hrulefill}.}}
\def\mag#1#2#3#4#5{{\bf#1}.\ #2.\ {\it #3} (#5): #4.}
\def\magibid#1#2#3#4{\ibid\ #1.\ {\it #2} (#4): #3.}
\def\magpunc#1#2#3#4#5{{\bf#1}.\ #2\ {\it #3} (#5): #4.}
\def\magNP#1#2#3#4{{\bf#1}.\ #2.\ {\it #3} (#4).}
\def\magNPibid#1#2#3{\ibid\ #1.\ {\it #2} (#3).}
\def\proceed#1#2#3#4#5#6{{\bf#1}.\ #2.\ {\it#3}:\ #4.\ #5\ (#6).}
\def\proceedNP#1#2#3#4#5{{\bf#1}.\ #2.\ {\it#3}.\ #4\ (#5).}
\def\procpunc#1#2#3#4#5#6{{\bf#1}.\ #2\ {\it#3}:\ #4.\ #5\ (#6).}
\def\procpuncNP#1#2#3#4#5{{\bf#1}.\ #2\ {\it#3}.\ #4\ (#5).}
\def\paper#1#2#3#4#5{{\bf#1}.\ #2\ {\it#3}\ (#4):\ #5.}
\def\paperibid#1#2#3#4{\ibid\ #1\ {\it#2}\ (#3):\ #4.}

\mag{Barlow, J}
	{Coming Into The Country}
	{Communications of the ACM @r{34:3}}
	{2}
	{March 1991}
	{ Addresses ``Cyberspace''---John Barlow was a co-founder of the EFF.}

\proceed{Collyer, G., {\rm and} Spencer, H}
	{News Need Not Be Slow}
	{Proceedings of the 1987 Winter USENIX Conference}
        {181--90}
	{USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA}
	{January 1987}

\mag{Denning, P}
	{The Internet Worm}
	{American Scientist}
	{126--128}
	{March--April 1989}

\magibid{The Science of Computing: Computer Networks}
	{American Scientist}
	{127--129}
	{March--April 1985}

\magpunc{Frey, D., {\rm and} Adams, R}
	{USENET: Death by Success?}
	{UNIX REVIEW}
	{55--60}
	{August 1987}

\mag{Gifford, W.~S}
	{ISDN User-Network Interfaces}
	{IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications}
	{343--348}
	{May 1986}

\mag{Ginsberg, K}
	{Getting from Here to There}
	{UNIX REVIEW}
	{45}
	{January 1986}

\mag{Hiltz, S.~R}
	{The Human Element in Computerized Conferencing Systems}
	{Computer Networks}
	{421--428}
	{December 1978}
	{}

\procpunc{Horton, M}
	{What is a Domain?}
	{Proceedings of the Summer 1984 USENIX Conference}
        {368--372}
	{USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA}
	{June 1984}

\mag{Jacobsen, Ole J}
	{Information on TCP/IP}
	{ConneXions---The Interoperability Report}
	{14--15}
	{July 1988}
	{}

\mag{Jennings, D., et al}
	{Computer Networking for Scientists}
	{Science}
	{943--950}
	{28 February 1986}
	{}

\paper{Markoff, J}
	{``Author of computer `virus' is son of U.S. electronic security expert.''}
	{New York Times}
	{Nov. 5, 1988}
	{A1}

\paperibid{``Computer snarl: A `back door' ajar.''}
	{New York Times}
	{Nov. 7, 1988}
	{B10}

\mag{McQuillan, J.~M., {\rm and} Walden, D.~C}
	{The ARPA Network Design Decisions}
	{Computer Networks}
	{243--289}
	{1977}
	{}

\magNP{Ornstein, S.~M}
	{A letter concerning the Internet worm}
	{Communications of the ACM @r{32:6}}
        {June 1989}

\proceed{Partridge, C}
	{Mail Routing Using Domain Names: An Informal Tour}
	{Proceedings of the 1986 Summer USENIX Conference}
        {366--76}
	{USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA}
	{June 1986}

\mag{Quarterman, J}
	{Etiquette and Ethics}
	{ConneXions---The Interoperability Report}
	{12--16}
	{March 1989}
	{}

\magNPibid{Notable Computer Networks}
	{Communications of the ACM @r{29:10}}
	{October 1986}
	{ This was the predecessor to {\sl The Matrix}.}

\mag{Raeder, A.~W., {\rm and} Andrews, K.~L}
	{Searching Library Catalogs on the Internet: A Survey}
        {Database Searcher 6}
        {16--31}
        {September 1990}

\proceed{Seeley, D}
	{A tour of the worm}
	{Proceedings of the 1989 Winter USENIX Conference}
        {287--304}
	{USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA}
	{February 1989}

\mag{Shulman, G}
	{Legal Research on USENET Liability Issues}
	{;login: The USENIX Association Newsletter}
	{11--17}
	{December 1984}

\mag{Smith, K}
	{E-Mail to Anywhere}
	{PC World}
	{220--223}
	{March 1988}

\mag{Stoll, C}
	{Stalking the Wily Hacker}
	{Communications of the ACM @r{31:5}}
	{14}
	{May 1988}
	{ This article grew into the book {\sl The Cuckoo's Egg}.}

\proceed{Taylor, D}
	{The Postman Always Rings Twice: Electronic Mail in a Highly Distributed Environment}
	{Proceedings of the 1988 Winter USENIX Conference}
        {145--153}
	{USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA}
	{December 1988}
	
\magNP{U.S.~Gen'l Accounting Ofc}
	{Computer Security: Virus Highlights Need for Improved Internet Management}
	{GAO~/~IMTEC~-~89~-~57,}
	{1989}
	{Addresses the Internet worm.}
@end tex

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@flushright
``And all else is literature.''
@b{Paul Verlaine}
@cite{The Sun}, New York
@c While he was city editor in 1873--1890.
@end flushright
