@c -*-tex-*-
@node Commercial Services
@chapter Commercial Services

Many services can be accessed through the Internet.  As time
progresses and more outlets for commercial activity appear,
once-restricted traffic (by the NSFnet Acceptable Use Policy) may now
flow freely.  Now that there are other networks for that information
to travel on, businesses are making their move.

@c @node Internet Service Providers
@c @section Internet Service Providers
@c @cindex getting connected
@c @cindex service providers
@c @cindex Alternet
@c @cindex PSI
@c 
@c Providers (AlterNet, PSI, etc)...
@c
@c @node Supercomputers
@c @section Supercomputers
@c @cindex Supercomputers
@c
@c The Internet Resource Guide (@pxref{IRG}) contains a chapter on
@c computer time that's available for a fee.  Rather than reproduce it
@c here, which would fast become out-of-date as well as triple the size
@c of this guide, it's suggested that the reader consult the IRG if such
@c services are of interest.

@node Electronic Journals
@section Electronic Journals
@cindex journals
@cindex ARL
@c @cindex ARL (Association of Research Libraries)

The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) publishes a hard-copy
directory of electronic journals, newsletters, and scholarly
discussion lists.  It is a compilation of entries for hundreds of
scholarly lists, dozens of journals and newsletters, and a many
``other'' titles, including newsletter-digests, into one reference
source.  Each entry includes instructions on how to access the
referenced publication or list.

The documents are available electronically by sending the commands

@smallexample
get ejournl1 directry
get ejournl2 directry
@end smallexample

@noindent
to the server at @samp{LISTSERV@@OTTAWA.BITNET}.
@xref{Listservs} for further instructions on using a listserv.
@cindex listserv

The directory, along with a compilation by Diane Kovacs called
@cite{Directories of Academic E-Mail Conferences}, is available in
print and on diskette (DOS WordPerfect and MacWord) from:

@display
Office of Scientific & Academic Publishing
Association of Research Libraries
1527 New Hampshire Avenue, NW
Washington, DC  20036
@code{ARLHQ@@UMDC.BITNET}
(202) 232--2466
(202) 462--7849 (Fax)
@end display

@noindent
The ARL is a not-for-profit organization representing over one hundred
research libraries in the United States and Canada.  The publication
is available to ARL members for $10 and to non-members for $20 (add $5
postage per directory for foreign addresses).  Orders
of six or more copies will receive a 10% discount; all orders must be
prepaid and sent to the ARL.

@node Commercial Databases
@section Commercial Databases
@cindex databases

The American Institute of Physics maintains the Physics Information
Network.  It contains the bibliographic SPIN and General Physics
Advanced Abstracts databases.  Also available is access to bulletin
boards and several searchable lists (job notices, announcements, etc).
Telnet to @code{pinet.aip.org}; new users must log in as @samp{NEW}
and give registration information.

@c @cindex WAIS
@c Some of the databases accessible through WAIS (@pxref{WAIS}) are
@c available for a fee.

@node Clarinet,  , commercial, commercial
@section Clarinet News
@cindex Clarinet

Clarinet's an electronic publishing network service that provides
professional news and information, including live UPI wireservice
news, in the Usenet file format. @xref{Usenet News} for more
information about Usenet.

Clarinet lets you read an ``electronic newspaper'' right on the local
system; you can get timely industry news, technology related
wirestories, syndicated columns and features, financial information,
stock quotes and more.
@cindex quotes, stock

Clarinet's provided by using the Usenet message interchange format,
and is available via UUCP and other delivery protocols, including
NNTP.
@cindex UUCP
@cindex NNTP

The main feature is @dfn{ClariNews}, an ``electronic newspaper,''
gathered live from the wire services of United Press International
(UPI).  ClariNews articles are distributed in 100 newsgroups based on
their subject matter, and are keyworded for additional topics and the
geographical location of the story.  ClariNews includes headlines,
industry news, box scores, network TV schedules, and more. The main
products of ClariNews are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@strong{ClariNews General}, the general news``paper'' with news,
sports, and features, averaging about 400 stories per day.

@item
@strong{TechWire}, special groups for stories on science,
technology, and industry stories around them.

@item
@strong{ClariNews-Biz}, business and financial stories.

@item
@strong{Newsbytes}, a daily computer industry newsmagazine.

@item
@strong{Syndicated Columns}, including Dave Barry (humor) and Mike
Royko (opinion).
@end itemize

@noindent
Full information on ClariNet, including subscription information, is
available from

@display
Clarinet Communications Corp.
124 King St. North
Waterloo, Ontario  N2J 2X8
@code{info@@clarinet.com}
(800) USE-NETS
@end display

@noindent
or with anonymous FTP in the directory @file{/Clarinet} on
@code{ftp.uu.net} (@pxref{Anonymous FTP}).

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@flushright
``Needless to say, Aristotle did not envisage modern finance.''
@b{Frederick Copleston, S.J.}
@cite{A History of Philosophy, v.1}
@c A History of Philosophy: Vol 1 Greece & Rome Part II, p95
@end flushright
