@c -*-tex-*-
@unnumbered Preface
@node Preface

The composition of this booklet was originally started because the
Computer Science department at Widener University was in desperate
need of documentation describing the capabilities of this ``great new
Internet link'' we obtained.

It's since grown into an effort to acquaint the reader with much of
what's currently available over the Internet.  Aimed at the novice
user, it attempts to remain operating system ``neutral''---little
information herein is specific to Unix, VMS, or any other environment.
This booklet will, hopefully, be usable by nearly anyone.

@iftex
Some typographical conventions are maintained throughout this guide.
All abstract items like possible filenames, usernames, etc., are all
represented in @var{italics}.  Likewise, definite filenames and email
addresses are represented in a quoted @samp{typewriter} font.  A
user's session is usually offset from the rest of the paragraph, as
such:

@smallexample
prompt> command
     The results are usually displayed here.
@end smallexample
@end iftex

The purpose of this booklet is two-fold: first, it's intended to serve
as a reference piece, which someone can easily grab on the fly and
look something up.  Also, it forms a foundation from which people can
explore the vast expanse of the Internet.  @cite{Zen and the Art of
the Internet} doesn't spend a significant amount of time on any one
point; rather, it provides enough for people to learn the specifics of
what his or her local system offers.

One warning is perhaps in order---this territory we are entering can
become a fantastic time-sink.  Hours can slip by, people can come and
go, and you'll be locked into Cyberspace.  Remember to do your work!
@cindex Cyberspace

With that, I welcome you, the new user, to The Net.

@flushright
@*brendan@@cs.widener.edu
Chester, PA
@end flushright
