@c -*-tex-*-
@node Telnet
@chapter Telnet

@dfn{Telnet} is the main Internet protocol for creating a connection
with a remote machine.  It gives the user the opportunity to be on one
computer system and do work on another, which may be across the street
or thousands of miles away.  Where modems are limited, in the majority,
by the quality of telephone lines and a single connection, telnet
provides a connection that's error-free and nearly always faster than
the latest conventional modems.

@menu
@end menu

@node Using Telnet
@section Using Telnet

As with FTP (@pxref{Anonymous FTP}), the actual command for negotiating a telnet
connection varies from system to system.  The most common is
@code{telnet} itself, though.  It takes the form of:
@smallexample
@kbd{telnet @var{somewhere.domain}}
@end smallexample

@noindent
To be safe, we'll use your local system as a working example.  By now,
you hopefully know your site's domain name.  If not, @emph{ask} or try
to figure it out.  You'll not get by without it.

To open the connection, type
@smallexample
@kbd{telnet @var{your.system.name}}
@end smallexample

@noindent
If the system were @code{wubba.cs.widener.edu}, for example, the
command would look like

@smallexample
@kbd{telnet wubba.cs.widener.edu}
@end smallexample

@noindent
The system will respond with something similar to

@smallexample
Trying 147.31.254.999...
Connected to wubba.cs.widener.edu.
Escape character is '^]'.
@end smallexample

@noindent
The @dfn{escape character}, in this example @key{^]} (Control-]), is
the character that will let you go back to the local system to close
the connection, suspend it, etc.  To close this connection, the user
would type @kbd{^]}, and respond to the @code{telnet>} prompt with the
command @kbd{close}.  Local documentation should be checked for
information on specific commands, functions, and escape character that
can be used.

@node Telnet Ports
@subsection Telnet Ports

Many telnet clients also include a third option, the @dfn{port} on
which the connection should take place.  Normally, port 23 is the
default telnet port; the user never has to think about it.  But
sometimes it's desirable to telnet to a different port on a system,
where there may be a service available, or to aid in debugging a
problem.  Using

@smallexample
telnet @var{somewhere.domain} @var{port}
@end smallexample

@noindent
will connect the user to the given @var{port} on the system
@var{somewhere.domain}.  Many libraries use this port method to offer
their facilities to the general Internet community; other services are
also available.  For instance, one would type

@smallexample
telnet martini.eecs.umich.edu 3000
@end smallexample

@noindent
to connect to the geographic server at the University of Michigan
(@pxref{Geographic Server}).  Other such port connections follow the
same usage.

@node Libraries, BBSs, Creating, Telnet
@section Publicly Accessible Libraries
@cindex libraries

Over the last several years, most university libraries have switched
from a manual (card) catalog system to computerized library catalogs.
The automated systems provide users with easily accessible and
up-to-date information about the books available in these libraries.
This has been further improved upon with the advent of local area
networks, dialup modems, and wide area networks.  Now many of us can
check on our local library's holdings or that of a library halfway
around the world!

Many, many institutions of higher learning have made their library
catalogs available for searching by anyone on the Internet.  They
include Boston University, the Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries
(CARL), and London University King's College.
@cindex CARL
@c @cindex CARL (Colo. Alliance of Research Libs.)

To include a listing of some of the existing sites would not only be
far too long for this document, it would soon be out of date.
Instead, several lists are being maintained and are available either
by mail or via FTP.  Also, the Internet Resource Guide (IRG) also
describes a few libraries that are accessible---@pxref{IRG} for
further information.

Art @w{St. George} and  Ron Larsen are maintaining a list of
Internet-accessible libraries and databases often referred to as ``the
@w{St. George} directory.''  It began with only library catalogs but has
expanded to include sections on campus-wide information systems, and
even bulletin board systems that are not on the Internet.  The library
catalog sections are divided into those that are free, those that
charge, and international (@w{i.e. non-U.S.}) catalogs; they are arranged
by state, province, or country within each section.  There is also a
section giving dialup information for some of the library catalogs.
It's available for FTP (@pxref{Anonymous FTP}) on @code{nic.cerf.net}
in the directory @file{cerfnet/cerfnet_info/library_catalog}.  The
file @file{internet-catalogs} has a date suffix; check for the most
current date.  The information is updated periodically.
@cindex FTPable Items

Billy Barron, Systems Manager at the University of North Texas,
produces a directory as an aid to his user community.  It complements
the St. George guide by providing a standard format for all systems
which lists the Internet address, login instructions, the system
vendor, and logoff information.  The arrangement is alphabetic by
organization name.  It's available for FTP on
@code{vaxb.acs.unt.edu} in the subdirectory @file{library} as the file
@file{libraries.txt}.
@cindex address, IP (Internet)
@cindex FTPable Items

For announcements of new libraries being available and discussion on
related topics, consult the Usenet newsgroup
@code{comp.internet.library} (@pxref{Usenet News} to learn how to read
news).

@c @node BBSs, FreeNet, Libraries, Telnet
@c @section Bulletin Board Systems
@c
@c need to finish!

@node Freenet,  , BBSs, Telnet
@section The Cleveland Freenet
@cindex Freenet

Freenets are open-access, free, community computer systems.  One such
system is the Cleveland Freenet, sponsored by CWRU (Case Western
Reserve University).  Anyone and everyone is welcome to join and take
part in the exciting project---that of a National Telecomputing Public
Network, where everyone benefits.  There's @emph{no} charge for the
registration process and @emph{no} charge to use the system.

To register, telnet to any one of

@example
freenet-in-a.cwru.edu
freenet-in-b.cwru.edu
freenet-in-c.cwru.edu
@end example

@noindent
After you're connected, choose the entry on the menu that signifies
you're a guest user.  Another menu will follow; select @samp{Apply for
an account}, and you'll be well on your way to being a FreeNet member.

You will need to fill out a form and send it to them through the
Postal Service---your login id and password will be created in a few
days.  At that point you're free to use the system as you wish.  They
provide multi-user chat, email, Usenet news, and a variety of other
things to keep you occupied for hours on end.

@node Directories
@section Directories

There are a few systems that are maintained to provide the Internet
community with access to lists of information---users, organizations,
etc.  They range from fully dedicated computers with access to papers
and research results, to a system to find out about the faculty
members of a university.

@node Knowbot
@subsection Knowbot
@cindex Knowbot

Knowbot is a ``master directory'' that contains email address
information from the NIC WHOIS database (@pxref{Whois}), the PSI White
Pages Pilot Project, the NYSERNET X.500 database and MCI Mail.  Most
of these services are email registries themselves, but Knowbot
provides a very comfortable way to access all of them in one place.
Telnet to @code{nri.reston.va.us} on port 185.

@node White Pages
@subsection White Pages
@cindex White Pages Pilot Project

PSI maintains a directory of information on individuals.  It will list
the person's name, organization, and email address if it is given.
Telnet to @code{wp.psi.net} and log in as @samp{fred}.  The White
Pages Project also includes an interface to use Xwindows remotely.

@c @node Faculty & Staff
@c @subsection Faculty and Staff Listings
@c 
@c Many universities offer access to information on current faculty and
@c staff.  Included are:
@c 
@c @smallexample
@c @r{Cornell}          @r{Telnet to} cuinfo.cornell.edu @r{on port 3000}.
@c @r{NC State}         @r{Telnet to} ccvax1.cc.ncsu.edu @r{and log in as} @samp{info}.
@c @r{Rutgers}          @r{Telnet to} hangout.rutgers.edu @r{on port 98}.
@c @r{U of Maryland}    @r{Telnet to} umail.umd.edu @r{and log in as} @samp{lookup}.
@c @r{UNC Chapel Hill}  @r{Telnet to} info.acs.unc.edu @r{and log in as} @samp{info}.
@c @r{Yale}             @r{Telnet to} yalevm.ycc.yale.edu @r{on port 300}.
@c @end smallexample

@node Databases
@section Databases

For information on database services, @pxref{Commercial Databases}.
Not all databases on the Internet require payment for use, though.
There do exist some, largely research-driven databases, which are
publicly accessible.  New ones spring up regularly.

To find out more about the databases in this section, contact the
people directly responsible for them.  Their areas of concentration
and the software used to implement them are widely disparate, and are
probably beyond the author's expertise.  Also, don't forget to check
with your local library---the reference librarian there can provide
information on conventional resources, and possibly even those
available over the Internet (they are becoming more common).

@node CARL
@subsection Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (CARL)
@c @cindex CARL (Colo. Alliance of Research Libs.)
@cindex CARL

The Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (CARL), in association
with CARL Systems Inc., operates a public access catalog of services.
Offered are a number of library databases, including searches for
government periodicals, book reviews, indices for current articles,
and access to to other library databases around the country.  Other
services are available to CARL members including an online
encyclopedia.  Telnet to @code{pac.carl.org}, or write to
@samp{help@@carl.org} for more details.

@node PENpages
@subsection PENpages

PENpages is an agriculturally-oriented database administered by
Pennsylvania State University.  Information entered into PENpages is
provided by numerous sources including the Pennsylvania Dept. of
Agriculture, Rutgers University, and Penn State.  Easy-to-use menus
guide users to information ranging from cattle and agricultural prices
to current weather information, from health information to
agricultural news from around the nation.  A keyword search option
also allows users to search the database for related information and
articles.  The database is updated daily, and a listing of most recent
additions is displayed after login.  Telnet to @code{psupen.psu.edu}
and log in as the user @samp{PNOTPA}.

@node Forestry & Agrigultural Network
@subsection Clemson Univ. Forestry & Agricultural Network

Clemson maintains a database similar to PENpages in content, but the
information provided tends to be localized to the Southeastern United
States.  A menu-driven database offers queries involving the weather,
food, family, and human resources.  Telnet to
@code{eureka.clemson.edu} and log in as @samp{PUBLIC}.  You need to be
on a good VT100 emulator (or a real VT terminal).

@node UMD Info Database
@subsection University of Maryland Info Database

The Computer Science department of the University of Maryland
maintains a repository of information on a wide variety of topics.
They wish to give a working example of how network technology can (and
should) provide as much information as possible to those who use it.
Telnet to @code{info.umd.edu} and log in as @samp{info}.  The
information contained in the database is accessible through a
screen-oriented interface, and everything therein is available via
anonymous FTP.

There is a mailing list used to discuss the UMD Info Database,
welcoming suggestions for new information, comments on the interface
the system provides, and other related topics.  Send mail to
@code{listserv@@umdd.umd.edu} with a body of

@smallexample
subscribe INFO-L @var{Your Full Name}
@end smallexample

@noindent
@xref{Listservs} for more information on using the Listserv system.
@cindex listserv

@node Michigan Weather
@subsection University of Michigan Weather Underground
@cindex Weather

The University of Michigan's Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic, &
Space Sciences maintains a database of weather and related information
for the United States and Canada.  Available are current weather
conditions and forecasts for cities in the U.S., a national weather
summary, ski conditions, earthquake and hurricane updates, and a
listing of severe weather conditions.  Telnet to
@code{madlab.sprl.umich.edu} on port 3000 to use the system.

@node Geographic Server
@subsection Geographic Name Server

A geographic database listing information for cities in the United
States and some international locations is maintained by Merit, Inc.
The database is searchable by city name, zip code, etc.  It will
respond with a lot of information: the area code,
elevation, time zone, and longitude and latitude are included.  For
example, a query of @samp{19013} yields

@smallexample
@group
0 Chester
1 42045 Delaware
2 PA Pennsylvania
3 US United States
F 45 Populated place
L 39 50 58 N  75 21 22 W
P 45794
E 22
Z 19013
Z 19014
Z 19015
Z 19016
.
@end group
@end smallexample

@noindent
To use the server, telnet to @code{martini.eecs.umich.edu} on port
3000.  The command @samp{help} will yield further instructions, along
with an explanation for each of the fields in a reponse.
@cindex help, with geo server

@node FEDIX
@subsection FEDIX---Minority Scholarship Information
@cindex FEDIX
@cindex minority scholarships

FEDIX is an on-line information service that links the higher
education community and the federal government to facilitate research,
education, and services. The system provides accurate and timely
federal agency information to colleges, universities, and other
research organizations.  There are no registration fees and no access
charges for FEDIX whatsoever.

FEDIX offers the Minority On-Line Information Service (MOLIS), a
database listing current information about Black and Hispanic colleges
and universities.

Daily information updates are made on federal education and research
programs, scholarships, fellowships, and grants, available used
research equipment, and general information about FEDIX itself.  To
access the database, telnet to @code{fedix.fie.com} and log in as
@samp{fedix}.

@node Science & Technology Information System
@subsection Science & Technology Information System
@c @cindex STIS (Science & Technology Info. System)
@cindex STIS

The STIS is maintained by the National Science Foundation (NSF), and
provides access to many NSF publications.  The full text of
publications can be searched online and copied from the system, which
can accommodate up to ten users at one time.  Telnet to
@code{stis.nsf.gov} and log in as @samp{public}.  Everything on the
system is also available via anonymous FTP.  For further information,
contact:

@display
STIS, Office of Information Systems, Room 401
National Science Foundation
1800 G. Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C.  20550
@code{stis-request@@nsf.gov}
(202) 357-7492
(202) 357-7663 (Fax)
@end display

@node Ocean Network Information Center
@subsection Ocean Network Information Center
@c @cindex OCEANIC (Ocean Network Information Center)
@cindex OCEANIC

The University of Delaware College of Marine Studies offers access to
an interactive database of research information covering all aspects
of marine studies, nicknamed OCEANIC.  This includes the World Oceanic
Circulation Experiment (WOCE) information and program information,
research ship schedules and information, and a Who's Who of email and
mailing addresses for oceanic studies.  Data from a variety of
academic institutions based on research studies is also available.
Telnet to @code{delocn.udel.edu} and log in as @samp{INFO}.

@node Extragalactic Database
@subsection NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED)
@c @cindex NED (NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database)
@cindex NED
@cindex extragalactic database

The NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) is an ongoing project,
funded by NASA, to make data and literature on extragalactic objects
available over computer networks.  NED is an object-oriented database
which contains extensive information for nearly 132,000 extragalactic
objects taken from about major catalogs of galaxies, quasars, infrared
and radio sources.  NED provides positions, names, and other basic
data (e.g. magnitude types, sizes and redshifts as well as
bibliographic references and abstracts).  Searches can be done by
name, around a name, and on an astronomical position.  NED contains a
tutorial which guides the user through the retrieval process.  Telnet
to @code{ipac.caltech.edu} and log in as @samp{ned}.

@node Naval Observatory Database
@subsection U.S. Naval Observatory Automated Data Service

Operated by the U.S. Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C., this
automated data service provides database access to information ranging
from current navigational satellite positioning, astronomical data,
and software utilities. A wide variety of databases can be searched
and instructions for file transfer are given.  Telnet to
@code{tycho.usno.navy.mil} and log in as @samp{ads}.

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@flushright
``My consciousness suddenly switched locations, for the first time in
my life, from the vicinity of my head and body to a point about
twenty feet away from where I normally see the world.''
@b{Howard Rheingold}, @cite{Virtual Reality}
@c p255
@end flushright
