.\"
.\" @(#)xmcd.man	6.17 98/09/27
.\"
.\"   xmcd - Motif(tm) CD Audio Player
.\"
.\"   Copyright (C) 1993-1998  Ti Kan
.\"   E-mail: ti@amb.org
.\"
.\"   This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"   the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"   (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"   This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"   Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH XMCD 1 "18 March 1998" "v2.4"

.SH "NAME"
xmcd \- CD digital audio player utility for X11/Motif

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B xmcd
.nh
[\fItoolkitoption ...] [-\fIdev\fP device] [-\fIdebug\fP]
[-\fIc\fP device] [-\fIX\fP] [-\fIo\fP]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.I Xmcd
is a program that allows the use of the CD-ROM or CD-R drive as
a full-featured stereo compact-disc player for the X window system.
See
.I cda(1)
for the command-line CD player.
.I xmcd
and
.I cda
uses the same configuration and support files.
.PP
Most of the features found on "real" CD players are available in
.I xmcd,
such as shuffle and repeat, track programming functions,
a numeric keypad and track warp slider for direct track access.
Additional functions include sample play, A to B segment play,
volume control, balance control, etc.  Several automation
options are also available on CD load, eject, play completion
and program exit.  A Channel Routing feature allow you to
select from several stereo or mono routing options.  The
volume control slider taper characteristics can also be
altered.
.PP
Multi-disc changers are also supported.  There are buttons
to switch to the next or previous disc in the changer, as well
as a way to specify a specific disc via the keypad.  You can
select to play only a single disc or auto-play all discs in
normal or reverse order.
.PP
A CD database feature allows the CD artist/title and
track titles, and other associated general purpose text to be
maintained and loaded as the program is started or when a
CD is inserted.  The CD database contents can be on your
local system or queried from a remote CD database server host.
There are a number of worldwide Internet public CD database servers
in operation, serving in both CDDBP (CD database protocol) and
HTTP (Hyper-text transport protocol).  Xmcd supports both of
these protocols.
.PP
Full feature-specific pop-up help is available for
all controls, indicators, text input fields, and lists.
.PP
On systems with more than one CD-ROM or CD-R drive, multiple
invocations of
.I xmcd
can be used to operate each drive independently.
.PP
.I Xmcd
is designed to be easy to use, as the main window is
purposely made to resemble a real CD player front panel.
All other pop-up windows are also designed to be as
intuitive as possible.  Moreover, while the use of a mouse
is natural with
.I xmcd,
all functionality can also be operated via the keyboard.
This is in conformance to the guidelines published in the
.I OSF/Motif Style Guide
from the Open Software Foundation.
.PP
The internal architecture of
.I xmcd
is designed to be easily portable to many UNIX operating
system variants, and adaptable to the myriad of CD-ROM drives
available.

.SH "OPTIONS"
All standard \fIXt Intrinsics\fR toolkit options are supported.
In addition,
.I xmcd
supports the following options:
.TP
\fI\-dev\ device\fR
.br
Specifies the path name to the raw CD-ROM device.  If this option is
not used, the default device to be used is the first
drive set up with the
.I xmcd
configuration program (See below).
.TP
\fI\-debug\fR
Causes verbose debugging diagnostics to be printed on \fIstderr\fR.
.TP
\fI\-c\ device (Solaris 2 only)\fR
Same as the
.I -dev
option.
.TP
\fI\-X (Solaris 2 only)\fR
Causes the \fBexitOnEject\fR parameter to be set to True.
.TP
\fI\-o (Solaris 2 only)\fR
This option has no effect.
.PP
The
.I -c, -X
and
.I -o
options are provided only on the Solaris 2 platform
for compatibility with the
.I action_workman.so
auto-startup program, running under the Solaris 2 Volume Manager.
See the README file in the
.I xmcd
distribution about configuring
.I xmcd
for the Solaris 2 Volume Manager.

.SH "X RESOURCES"
.I Xmcd
has many adjustable X resources to customize its look and feel, as well
as its behavior.  Notably, the colors of virtually every feature on
\fIxmcd\fR's windows can be changed, as well as the text fonts.  All
text labels can also be changed (for example, to another language).
.PP
There are too many resources to list here, but the resource names
and their defaults (plus descriptive comments) can be found in the
\fBLIBDIR\fI/app-defaults/XMcd\fR
file (where LIBDIR is typically \fI/usr/lib/X11\fR).
It is not recommended
that you change values in the \fBLIBDIR\fI/app-defaults/XMcd\fR file,
unless you want the changes to be forced upon all users of
.I xmcd
on the system.  Instead, make a copy of this file, change the copy as you
see fit, then place it in your home directory.  Your custom resource
settings will then override the defaults when
.I xmcd
is subsequently started.  Alternatively, you may also place specific
resources you wish to override in the
.I .Xdefaults
file in your home directory.

.SH "DEVICE CONFIGURATION"
The X resources described in the previous section affect the
general appearance and behavior of
.I xmcd.
There are two additional configuration files which are used
to adapt
.I xmcd
to your site requirements.  The first of these contain
common parameters, and the second contain
configurable parameters that must vary on a
per-drive basis.  For example, in some cases
.I xmcd
must operate the drive differently depending upon the brand
and model of the drive.  Thus, there must be a separate
configuration file for these parameters \fIper-device\fR.
The common parameters file is \fBXMCDLIB\fI/config/common.cfg\fR
and the device-specific parameters file is
\fBXMCDLIB\fI/config/\fBDEVICE\fR
(where XMCDLIB is typically \fI/usr/lib/X11/xmcd\fR and DEVICE is
the base name of the raw device special file for the CD-ROM drive
; e.g., \fI/usr/lib/X11/xmcd/config/rcd0\fR).
A configuration program \fBXMCDLIB\fI/config/config.sh\fR
is provided to make maintaining these configuration
file easy (Note: on SCO systems the configuration program can
also be invoked as "\fImkdev xmcd\fR").
.PP
You should always use the configuration program to set the
configuration parameters when installing
.I xmcd
for the first time, or when the CD-ROM hardware configuration has
changed.  If this is not done then
.I xmcd
will probably not operate correctly with your CD-ROM drive.
.PP
.B WARNING:
If
.I xmcd
is not correctly configured, you may cause
.I xmcd
to deliver commands that are not supported by your CD-ROM drive.
Under some environments this may lead to system hang or crash.
.PP
You can override some of the device-specific configuration parameters
by adding your own configuration files.
.I Xmcd
will also look in the
\fBHOME\fI/.xmcdcfg/common.cfg\fR and
\fBHOME\fI/.xmcdcfg/\fBDEVICE\fR files for
common and device-specific parameters (where HOME is your home
directory and DEVICE is as specified above).  Parameters found in
this file will override the system defaults (except those
parameters that cannot be overridden; see the comments in the
\fBXMCDLIB\fI/config/device.cfg\fR for details).

.SH "USING XMCD"
The basic functions of
.I xmcd
are designed to operate the same way as on a real stereo CD player.
The pictorial symbols used on the main window buttons are intended
to illustrate the function in a non-language-specific manner.  You
can also change all main window buttons to display a text label
instead of the pictorial symbols, by clicking the \fBbtn\fR
check-box button (the "A" symbol enclosed in a box) located at the
upper left hand corner of the main window.
.PP
The CD database and track programming functions are operated
via the CD Database/Track Program Editor pop-up subwindow.
You activate the subwindow by clicking the \fBcddb/prog\fR button
(file cabinet symbol) on the main window (See "CD DATABASE" below).
.PP
There will not be a per-item description of all the features,
because full on-line help is available (See "ONLINE HELP" below).

.SH "ONLINE HELP"
For general information about
.I xmcd,
click the \fBhelp\fR (question mark symbol) button on the
.I xmcd
main window.  You can also get specific help information
about each button, control, indicator, text entry area,
selection list by positioning the mouse cursor over the
desired item, then clicking the third mouse button.
A pop-up window will appear, containing the relevant
help text.

.SH "TRACK PROGRAMMING"
You can program
.I xmcd
to play only certain tracks, in a custom sequence.
To do so, invoke the CD Database window (by clicking the
.B cddb/prog
button on the main window).  Select the desired track by clicking on
the entry in the
.B Track list,
and click the
.B Add
button to add to the play sequence.  Notice that the track number
appears in the
.B Program sequence
text field.  You can also type the track numbers, separated with
commas, directly in the
.B Program sequence
field.  Repeat until all desired tracks have been entered,
then click the
.B Play/Pause
button (on the main window) to start the program play.
.PP
When a program sequence is defined, the
.B prog
indicator in the main window display area "illuminates".
To erase the program sequence, click the
.B Clear
button on the CD Database/Program Editor window.

.SH "CD DATABASE"
The CD Database feature of
.I xmcd
allows you to enter the CD artist/title, track titles, other
free-form text (such as band information, lyrics, etc.) associated
with the disc and tracks, and a track play program.  After this
information is typed in and saved to a database file, it will
automatically appear on the
.I xmcd
CD Database window the next time you insert the same CD.
.PP
You must perform a "save" operation (click the
.B Save
button) after typing in the database information before ejecting
the CD or exiting, or the information will be lost.  If this is
the first time this CD database entry is being stored, you will
be asked to select a category (rock, classical, jazz, etc.) under
which to classify the CD.  The category is used by
.I xmcd
to determine the actual directory in the filesystem to write
the database file.
.PP
You must type the CD information into the database because the
CD's table of contents (TOC) contains only the number of tracks and
the starting address of each track, but not the actual disc
and track titles.
.PP
The CD database window should prove to be intuitive to use.
You may use the on-line help system to obtain specific help
information about the various buttons and items.
.PP
The CD database information is stored in text files, one per CD,
in a designated directory (category).  The path of this
directory is \fBXMCDLIB\fI/cddb/\fBCATEGORY\fR, where XMCDLIB
is the directory specified by the XMcd.libdir resource, and
CATEGORY is the category name selected when
.B Save
is performed.  See the description of XMCD_CDDBPATH in the
ENVIRONMENT section below.
.PP
You may view the list of directories that
.I xmcd
will search for CD database files by clicking the
.B About...
button and viewing the pop-up information window.
.PP
The file name of each CD database entry is a hexadecimal representation
of a special "magic" number computed by
.I xmcd
based on the number of tracks, track timings, and other available
information about this CD.  This method is used because there is
no reliable unique CD identifier to be found on the CD
itself (the CD standard allows for a readable IPC/barcode but
very few CDs actually contain such information).
.PP
Since different pressings of the same CD may sometimes contain slightly
different track timings, the resultant magic number computed by
.I xmcd
on these CDs will be different.  Thus, if you load a CD that is not
the same one that a CD database entry was created with (but is
actually the same CD title),
.I xmcd
may not recognize it and display the database information
automatically when you insert the CD.  In this event, you can
search the CD database and find the appropriate entry, and establish
a "link" to it.  To do so, click the
.B Link
button, and select the appropriate category on the popup window.
.I Xmcd
will then present another pop-up window containing a list of all
CD database entries in the specified category (that has the same
number of tracks as the currently inserted disc).  Select the
appropriate entry and a link will be made in the CD database.
.PP
The
.B Link
feature alleviates the need to type in CD database information again
and avoids duplicate CD database entries.
.PP
In very rare occasions it is possible that the magic number of a CD
conflicts with that of another.  This is a problem that will be addressed
in a future release of
.I xmcd.
.PP
A master
.I xmcd
CD database of thousands of CD titles is available for Internet
anonymous FTP.  Visit the
.I xmcd
web site for details.  You are encouraged to contribute to
this database by sending CD database entries (that you typed in)
to the archive.  The master CD database is updated periodically
with new user-contributed entries.
To do so, you click the
.B Send
button on the CD database/Track Program Editor pop-up subwindow.
Clicking this button causes the CD database entry (associated
with the currently loaded CD) to be sent to the
.I xmcd
CD database archive server.
You should use this feature only if your computer is configured
to send Internet electronic mail.  You can send a CD database
entry only after you first save it to your local CD database.
.PP
.I Xmcd
also has the ability to query a remote CD database server host
for CD database information.  Thus, it is not necessary to
keep a full copy of the master CD database locally.  If your system is
connected to a TCP/IP network (such as the Internet) and has access
to a server system running the CD database \fIserver\fR program,
you can configure your xmcd \fIclient\fR to query the server.
The \fBcddbPath\fR parameter or the XMCD_CDDBPATH environment
variable is used to configure the use of a remote server.
See the ENVIRONMENT section below for details.
.PP
You may configure
.I xmcd
to communicate with the CD database server in either
CDDBP or HTTP protocols.  The CDDBP protocol is the standard
CD database protocol developed for use by xmcd and other
clients.  The HTTP protocol is intended for users
who are behind a firewall that allows HTTP traffic (for web
access) but blocks the normal CDDBP port,  Not all public
CD database server sites support HTTP.  Please visit the
CD database server web site to get a list of the current
public CD database servers in operation, and the protocols
they support.
.PP
While
.I xmcd
is running, the file \fB/tmp/.cdaudio/curr.\fInnnn\fR (where
nnnn is the hexadecimal representation of the CD-ROM's
device number) contains the device node path, CD database category
and disc identifier information pertaining to the currently loaded CD.
Other applications may read this file to identify the
currently loaded disc.

.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
Several environment variables are currently recognized by
.I xmcd,
and are described as follows:
.IP \fBXMCD_LIBDIR\fR
This is used to override the XMcd.libdir resource.  This parameter
is the directory path under which
.I xmcd's
configuration files, help files, and CD database files are located.
The default value of XMCD_LIBDIR on most systems
is \fI/usr/lib/X11/xmcd\fR.
.IP \fBXMCD_CDDBPATH\fR
This is used to override the \fBcddbPath\fR common configuration parameter,
which is a list of CD database category directories to be
used under \fBXMCDLIB\fI/cddb\fR (where XMCDLIB is the
directory root specified by the XMcd.libdir resource or the
XMCD_LIBDIR environment variable).  Also, remote CD database hosts
can be specified.
.sp
.in +4
\fBrock;classical;jazz;newage;soundtrack;misc\fR
.in -4
.sp
This string will cause
.I xmcd
to search the following directories for CD database files:
.sp
.in +4
\fBXMCDLIB\fI/cddb/rock\fR
.br
\fBXMCDLIB\fI/cddb/classical\fR
.br
\fBXMCDLIB\fI/cddb/jazz\fR
.br
etc.
.in -4
.sp
You may also specify absolute path names in the XMCD_CDDBPATH
entries.  Example:
.sp
.in +4
\fBrock;classical;/home/john/industrial;~john/punk;~/cddb/jazz\fR
.in -4
.sp
You may also specify a remote CD database server hosts
which xmcd can use to query CD database information.  The syntax
is in URL form:

	\fIprotocol\fR://\fIhostname\fR[\fI:port\fR]/\fIpath\fR

The
.I protocol
is either "cddbp" or "http", depending on which protocol
you want xmcd to use to communicate with the remote server.
The
.I hostname
can be a fully qualified host name or an IP number.
The
.I port
number is optional (the default is 888 for
.I cddbp
and 80 for
.I http
) and the path is used only in the
.I http
mode.
.PP
Example:
.sp
.in +4
\fBcountry;folk;cddbp://abc.fubar.com;http://xyz.snafu.com/~cddb/cddb.cgi\fR
.in -4
.IP \fBHOME\fR
This is used to determine your home directory.
.I Xmcd
first tries to obtain your home directory from the \fI/etc/passwd\fR file.
If that is not found, then it uses what is defined in the
HOME environment variable.  The home directory path is used by
.I xmcd
to locate the \fI.xmcdcfg\fR directory.

.SH "NOTES"
Not all CD-ROM drives support all features that appear on
.I xmcd.
For example, some drives do not support a software-driven
volume control.  On these drives the
.I xmcd
volume control slider may have no effect, or in some cases it is
made to function as a mute control (i.e., it will snap to the
full-off or full-on positions only).  Similarly, the \fBcaddy lock\fR,
\fBeject\fR and \fBindex search\fR buttons found on
.I xmcd
may not have any effect on drives that do not support the
appropriate functionality.

.SH "FILES"
$HOME/.xmcdcfg/\(**
.br
XMCDLIB/cddb/\(**
.br
XMCDLIB/config/config.sh
.br
XMCDLIB/config/common.cfg
.br
XMCDLIB/config/device.cfg
.br
XMCDLIB/config/.tbl/\(**
.br
XMCDLIB/config/\(**
.br
XMCDLIB/help/\(**
.br
LIBDIR/app-defaults/XMcd
.br
BINDIR/xmcd
.br
MANDIR/xmcd.1
.br
/tmp/.cdaudio/\(**

.SH "RELATED WEB SITES"
Xmcd/cda home page: \fIhttp://sunsite.unc.edu/tkan/xmcd/\fR
.br
CD database server page: \fIhttp://www.cddb.com/\fR
.br
Xmmix home page: \fIhttp://sunsite.unc.edu/tkan/xmmix/\fR

.SH "SEE ALSO"
cda(1), cddbcmd(1), wm2xmcd(1), X(1),
.br
Xmcd's README and INSTALL files
.br
Xmcd web site: http://sunsite.unc.edu/tkan/xmcd/
.br
CDDB web site: http://www.cddb.com/

.SH "AUTHOR"
Ti Kan (\fIti@amb.org\fR)
.br
AMB Research Laboratories, Sunnyvale, CA, U.S.A.
.PP
.I Xmcd
also contains code contributed by several dedicated individuals.
See the README file in the
.I xmcd
distribution for information.
.PP
Comments, suggestions, and bug reports are always welcome.
