.TH XBMBROWSER 1 "08 Jan 1993"
.SH NAME
xbmbrowser \- view and manage bitmap files.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xbmbrowser
[
.I toolkit options
]
[
.I directory
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
.B xbmbrowser 
will show you all the bitmaps in the 
.I directory
if it is specified otherwise it will look in the current directory.
Note that if the program can not change directory to the 
.I directory
in the command line it will exit and print an error message.

You can then select any bitmap that is displayed and you will be able to 
Rename, Copy, Delete, Edit and Set it as the root window bitmap. (Edit and SetRoot may not work on your installation \- you will have to try it to find out).

.B xbmbrowser
will take all the normal Athena Widget 
.I toolkit options
it is given. 

.SH USER DEFINABLE MENU

This version of
.B
xbmbrowser
has a user definable menu of commands that can be executed for a bitmap. There 
is a default setup file but you can have your own file called .xbmbrowserrc
in your home directory. The format is discussed below.

Comments are denoted by a # as the first letter on a line

Each line is one menu entry. They have the format of:

"Menu Name" "command" "popup query string"

The line MUST begin in the first character. that is LEFT JUSTIFIED or it
will be ignored.

The Command is any unix command and is executed by a system() call. 
In the command there are some place holders that you can use.

.nf
%b - Current bitmap name (no path)
%B - Current bitmap name (with full path)
%u - Users input string (default value in text box is %b)
%n - Users input string (default value in text box is blank)
%d - Current Directory
.fi

The Menu Name, command, and popup query string MUST exist in that order,
however if the popup is NOT wanted then make the popup query string an
empty string (""). If the popup query is not used and the %u place holder
is used in the command, an error message will be given and the menu item will
not appear.

The Popup Query will ALWAYS contain an Ok button which will execute the
command and a Cancel button which will cancel the command. If, in the
command, the users input string is used, the popup query will also have a
text input box that the user can enter a string into. The current bitmap
name is showen in the text box as the default value and can be changed.
The popup will also contain the text in the popup query string.

The use of a "~" and its associated shorthand directory notations (~/ = home,
~user = user's home) are allowed in the command and in the string entered by
the user in the popup query, They will be expanded before the command is
executed.

NOTE that when it is expanded there WILL NOT be a '/' at the end of the
directory name, so if you are going to concatinate another name to it
then make sure that you put a '/' before the other one. Note also that the
%b string does NOT have a leading '/'.

Some commands will not change the bitmaps in the current directory in any way
so that the directory doesn't have to be rescanned, to indicate that a rescan
is unneccessory, start the line with a "!". This is done with the Set Root,
and Grab menu items below.

.SH EXAMPLE .xbmbrowserrc FILE

.nf
# This is the setup file for xbmbrowser version 2.0
#
# Rename Menu Entry
"Rename" "mv %b %u" "Enter The New Name:"

# Copy Menu Entry
"Copy" "cp %b %u" "Copy to:"

# Delete Menu Entry
"Delete" "rm %b" "Really delete it?"

# Edit Menu Entry
!"Edit" "bitmap %b&" ""

# Set the bitmap as the root decoration
!"Set Root" "setroot -bitmap %b" ""

# Grab it Menu Entry
!"Grab It" "cp %b ~/X11/icons/%b" ""

.fi
For more examples look in the default menu definition file.

For instructions on how to use 
.B xbmbrowser
, start it and press the
.I Help
Button.

.SH FILES
.nf
/usr/local/X11R5/libX11/xbmbrowser.help 
     help file that is displayed in the
     help window.

/usr/local/X11R5/libX11/xbmbrowser.menu 
     default menu definition file. 
.fi

Note - These files might be in a different directory on your system.

.SH AUTHOR
.B Ashley Roll
-- aroll@gucis.cit.gu.edu.au

